Physics research

Version

This article has been verified for the current PC  (4.2) of the game.
Technology


 Physics research
 
 
 Physics is one of the three research areas. It consists of the following fields:
 Computing: research labs, research speed, science ships, ship computers, point-defense, sensors, espionage, Cosmogenesis advancement technologies.
 Field Manipulation: energy production, shields, cloaking devices, astral rifts, some strategic resources, cosmic storm manipulation.
 Particles: ship reactors, energy weapons, FTL travel, some strategic resources.
Contents








Table usage
Color indicators: Starter, Acquisition, Rare, Dangerous, Repeatable.
Notes:
The table shows the default names/icons of techs. Flavor entry is displayed if accompanied by a change to effects/requirements.
If a tech was available as a research option as part of the last choice, then its (total) weight is halved in the coming choice.
The table denotes the base cost of a tech. Actual in-game tech cost scales with  and  (number of colonized planets and population).
To research techs of higher tiers, it is necessary to first acquire six or more techs of the preceding tier.
Sorting the table by tiers places all Starter tech at the top and Repeatable end-game tech at the bottom.
Most icons also double as links. For more information about an unlocked effect (buildings, components, etc.), click on the accompanying icon.
Computing
The  Computing tech tree focuses on research, sensors and espionage. Most  Cosmogenesis technologies are also in this tree.
Computing event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Field Manipulation
The  Field Manipulation tech tree focuses on energy production and shields.
Field Manipulation event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Particles
The  Particles tech tree focuses on lasers, reactors and FTL.
Particles event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
