Society research

Version

This article has been verified for the current PC  (4.2) of the game.
Technology


 
 Society research
 
 Society is one of the three research areas. It consists of the following fields:
 Biology: food production, genetic modification, leader lifespan and enhancement, biological ship components, army types.
 Military Theory: fleet command limit, naval capacity, army buildings and stats, claim cost.
 New Worlds: habitability, terraforming, blocker removal, starbase capacity, upgraded capital buildings.
 Statecraft: unity and edicts, leaders, envoys, diplomacy, upgraded capital buildings, various buildings for unity, trade and amenities.
 Psionics, exotic technologies unlocked in mid to late game, associated with psionic ascension.
 Archaeostudies: archaeology, minor artifacts, archaeotechnologies, requires  Ancient Relics DLC
Contents
















Table usage
Color indicators: Starter, Acquisition, Rare, Dangerous, Repeatable.
Notes:
The table shows the default names/icons of techs. Flavor entry is displayed if accompanied by a change to effects/requirements.
If a tech was available as a research option as part of the last choice, then its (total) weight is halved in the coming choice.
The table denotes the base cost of a tech. Actual in-game tech cost scales with  and  (number of colonized planets and population).
To research techs of higher tiers, it is necessary to first acquire six or more techs of the preceding tier.
Sorting the table by tiers places all Starter tech at the top and Repeatable end-game tech at the bottom.
Most icons also double as links. For more information about an unlocked effect (buildings, components, etc.), click on the accompanying icon.
Biology
The  Biology tech tree focuses on food production, genetic modification, leader lifespan and enhancement, biological ship components, and unlocking additional army types.
Biological ship technologies
Biological ship technologies are only available to empires that use a biological shipset and will unlock or improve biological ships or Weaver components.
Biology event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Military Theory
The  Military Theory tech tree focuses on armies and the size of fleets.
Military Theory event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
New Worlds
The  New Worlds tech tree focuses on improving planets and starbase capacity.
New Worlds event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Statecraft
The  Statecraft tech tree focuses on various empire bonuses.
Statecraft event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Psionics
 Psionics is a small tech tree that grants a number of unique bonuses. Empires with the  Mindwardens origin do not have access to the tech tree and  Gestalt Consciousness empires require the  Shadows of the Shroud DLC.
Psionics event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Archaeostudies
The  Archaeostudies tech tree focuses on  Minor Artifacts and unlocks a number of unique buildings and ship components.
Archaeostudies technologies
The following technologies can be drawn after  Archaeostudies technology is researched or added as permanent research options by archaeology site events.
Precursor technologies
Precursor technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by Secrets of the Precursor special project.
