Engineering research

Version

This article has been verified for the current PC  (4.2) of the game.
Technology


 
 
 Engineering research
 Engineering is one of the three research areas. It consists of the following fields:
 Industry: mineral production, robotics, building construction, cosmic storm protection.
 Materials: armor, industrial buildings, strategic resources.
 Propulsion: kinetic and explosive weapons, thrusters.
 Voidcraft: ship types and hulls, starbases, strike craft, megastructures.
Contents













Table usage
Color indicators: Starter, Acquisition, Rare, Dangerous, Repeatable.
Notes:
The table shows the default names/icons of techs. Flavor entry is displayed if accompanied by a change to effects/requirements.
If a tech was available as a research option as part of the last choice, then its (total) weight is halved in the coming choice.
The table denotes the base cost of a tech. Actual in-game tech cost scales with  and  (number of colonized planets and population).
To research techs of higher tiers, it is necessary to first acquire six or more techs of the preceding tier.
Sorting the table by tiers places all Starter tech at the top and Repeatable end-game tech at the bottom.
Most icons also double as links. For more information about an unlocked effect (buildings, components, etc.), click on the accompanying icon.
Industry
The  Industry tech tree focuses on mineral production and robotic pops.
Industry event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Materials
The  Materials tech tree focuses on advanced and strategic resources and ship armor.
Materials event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Propulsion
The  Propulsion tech tree focuses on thruster, missile and kinetic ship components.
Propulsion event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
Voidcraft
The  Voidcraft tech tree focuses on ships and spaceborne structures.
Mechanical ship technologies
Mechanical ship technologies are only available to empires that use a mechanical shipset and will unlock or improve mechanical ships.
Ship stat technologies
The following technologies affect ship build cost, build speed, and stats. They cannot be researched by empires with the 
 Beastmasters
 civic.
Beastmasters technologies
The following technologies affect space fauna cloning cost, cloning speed, and stats. They can only be researched by empires with the 
 Beastmasters
 civic.
Voidcraft event technologies
The following technologies cannot be discovered by research draws and are added as permanent research options by events.
