Population

Version

Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article. At least some were last verified for  3.14.

This article is for the PC version of Stellaris only.

Demographics in a multi-species empire
Population, represented by  pops, drives the productivity and political action of an empire. Pops produce resources by working  jobs that are created by  districts and  buildings. Pops belonging to a specific  faction will produce  unity.
Contents





























Population groups
Population is grouped into pop groups. There is one pop group for each combination of species, stratum, ethic, and whether the pop is unemployed or not. Pop groups fill jobs. By default they will fill as many jobs as are available, provided there is sufficient population, but certain bonuses can allow pops to fill jobs above the current limit, producing extra resources.
Stratum
Strata represent pops' social classes and determines the  cost. Resettlement costs no  unity if the empire has the  Corvée System,  Subsumed Will, or  OTA Updates civic, or if the pop is enslaved or a non-sentient robot. If a pop takes a job above its stratum, it will be promoted to the higher stratum.
Individualist strata
Individualist empires use the following strata. The higher a pop's stratum, the more  political power they have and the more  consumer goods they require for upkeep. If there are no available jobs of equal or higher stratum the pop will become unemployed, causing  happiness penalties in most living standards for 4 years until the pop becomes a Civilian. The  Shared Burdens civic and living standards each reduce demotion time by −45% each, the  Kinship tradition reduces it by −75%, and defaulted empires have demotion time reduced by −50%. Slaves and  Hive-Minded pops demote instantly regardless of stratum. Hovering over an unemployed pop will show the remaining time until it is demoted.
Gestalt strata
 Gestalt Consciousness empires use the following strata. They promote and demote instantly and always take the  Corrupt/Deviant Drone jobs if any are present.
Other strata
These strata are present in both Individualist and Gestalt empires, and are always used if their requirements are met.
Fallen empire strata
These strata can only be used by fallen empires. If their requirements are not met, standard strata will be used.
Resettlement
Resettlement is the process of pops moving from one planet to another, more desirable one.
Automatic resettlement
Sapient, unemployed, free Civilian pops have a chance each month to automatically resettle to another planet with available jobs and  Housing and at least 40%  Habitability. If a  Slave Processing Facility is active on the planet, or if a  Transit Hub  is present in the system, enslaved pops and robots in servitude are also eligible. Pops cannot automatically resettle from planets that have been colonized for less than 61 months.
 Migration controls will prevent this (except for sapient robots).
The number of pops that will resettle from any planet each month is predetermined as of patch 4.0; by default, 10 pops will resettle per month. This value can be increased by:
a  Transit Hub  is present in the system: +20/mo
  edict (from the  of the same name) is active: +20/mo
  edict is active: +5/mo
researching  and : +2.5/mo each
a leader with  I or II is on the : +2.5/mo per rank
Note that the numbers above can be found by multiplying the base 10/mo by the percent increase listed in the tooltips.
Resettling pops will choose their destination based on a hidden weight value, determined using the stability of the planet and its Automatic Resettlement Destination Chance modifiers, ignoring any invalid planets (see above). Be aware that if you have any active migration treaties, other empires' planets become valid destinations for your pops. Of course, this can be used to your benefit if you have strong/several Automatic Resettlement Destination Chance modifiers, such as .
Forced resettlement
Forced resettlement will instantly move a pop from one planet to another. This costs a base amount of  energy and  unity determined by the pop's , which may be reduced by additional modifiers. Resettling the last pop of a world will add a cost of 200  Influence and abandon the world. Forced resettlement requires either the Allowed Resettlement policy, the  Cosmogenesis ascension perk, or the pop to be a non-sapient robot.

Happiness
Each pop in an empire has a  happiness rating. It ranges from 0% to 100% and has a base level of 50%. Happiness determines approval rating when combined with stratum  political power, as well as the following effects:
Each point of happiness above 50 adds +1%  governing ethics attraction to free pops and +2%  Authoritarian ethics attraction to slaves.
Each point of happiness below 50 adds −1%  governing ethics attraction to free pops and +10%  Egalitarian ethics attraction to slaves.
Each point of happiness above 50 gives each pop −0.02  crime, up to 0 per pop at 100% happiness.
Each point of Happiness below 50 gives each pop +0.02  crime, up to +2 per pop at 0% happiness.
Fortunately, there are many ways to improve happiness in an empire. Planetary  edicts, ,  living standards, ,  planet modifiers, and   can positively affect happiness.
 Faction approval also plays a major role in pop happiness and  may have an impact on planetary or empire happiness for a limited time as well.
Happiness can be affected by the following:

Political power
Pop  political power effects approval rating as well as  Faction resource production and support. Pops have a base of 0.01 political power. General political power modifiers stack multiplicatively with stratum specific ones. Stratum specific modifiers, except for living standards, only apply to employed pops.

Approval rating
Pop approval rating is a measure of the population's support towards the empire. It is determined by the average  happiness of each stratum, weighted by  political power. Pops without happiness are treated as having 50% happiness (for example: pops with  Nerve Stapled trait, pops with  Machine trait). The displayed approval rating is rounded down, as is the displayed  stability bonus.
Approval Rating=∑Pophappiness⋅political power∑Poppolitical power
Approval rating ranges from 0% to 100% and has a base level of 50%.
Each point of approval rating above 50% adds +0.6  stability, up to +30  stability at 100% approval rating.
Each point of approval rating below 50% adds −1  stability, up to −50  stability at 0% approval rating.
Upkeep
Upkeep of a pop heavily depends on the type of pop and the type of empire. Usually it consists of:
 – some basic resource for the pop to sustain itself
 upkeep – an amount of  consumer goods
 upkeep – additional resources needed for the pop to perform its job
 needs – a planet wide resource for pops to live in
 needs – a planet wide resource for pops to be happy about
Colony habitability lower than 100% for specific pop leads to penalties in the form of increased pop base upkeep and amenities needed for that pop.
See also: 
Base upkeep
Base upkeep is always 1 of a  basic resource per month, which depends on the type of pop and possibly its traits.
Certain species traits can replace part or all of a biological species' base upkeep with energy as well.
 Phototrophic trait, available to Fungoid or Plantoid pops, replace half their base upkeep with  energy upkeep. As do pops with the  Radiotrophic trait, with the addition that they require no energy upkeep when living on a  Tomb World.
 Voidling replaces all of a pop's base upkeep with  energy upkeep.
 Exotic Metabolism adds  0.125 exotic gases upkeep and  Cyborg traits add additional energy upkeep.
After base upkeep is determined, it can be modified by species, planet, or empire modifiers. For example,  Zombie pops have −100% base upkeep. Although there is a hidden cap of −90% for the sum of modified applied, this makes base upkeep always non-zero. 
Living standards upkeep
See also: 
In addition to base upkeep, non-Gestalt pops, including  Bio-Trophies, require a certain amount of  consumer goods based on their living standards. Synthetic ( Mechanical) pops that are given citizen rights require consumer goods as well. The amount of consumer goods typically depends on the pop's stratum, but other modifiers can increase or decrease this amount.
Housing
Housing represents the living space available for pops to live comfortably. Housing is primarily provided by districts, with  city districts giving more housing than their resource-focused alternatives. Each pop requires 1 unit of housing by default but the housing demands of individual pops can change due to a variety of factors. If the number of pops exceeds the amount of housing it will cause  stability to drop by 40⋅missing housingtotal housing required and a flat +50 planet emigration push.
As a rule of thumb, each resource district exactly pays for itself in terms of housing, while the pops that work building jobs need city districts (or housing buildings) for their housing, though the capital building provides some buffer before cities are needed. This applies equally to  Ecumenopolises. The  Agrarian Idyll civic gives extra housing to resource districts, allowing the empire to house its pops working building jobs mostly via resource districts. The Trans-Stellar Corporations  adds jobs to habitat trade districts, but does not match them with additional housing, making some residential districts necessary.
Amenities
Amenities represent the infrastructure and jobs dedicated to fulfilling the needs of the population on a given colony. Individualist empires obtain amenities from a variety of jobs while  Gestalt Consciousness empires obtain them primarily from  Maintenance Drone jobs. High amenities grant increased  happiness to citizen pops in regular empires and increased  stability in  Gestalt Consciousness empires, while insufficient amenities will lower pops' happiness (or stability, for Gestalts) on the colony.
Pops have a base amenity requirement of  1 Amenities,  slaves require 0.75, and non-citizen Robots require 0.5. The shown  amenities value is the available amenities value, or the surplus. After base amenities upkeep is determined, it can be modified by species, planet, or empire modifiers. 5 Amenities are always lost on every colony due to inefficiencies. The formula for available amenities (or extra amenities) is the following:
Available Amenities=Amenities Provided−(5+Pop Amenities Usage)=
=(Amenities Provided by Buildings+(Amenities Provided by Jobs⋅∑modifiers with Job scope))⋅∑modifiers with Planet/Empire scope−
−(5+Pop base Amenities Upkeep⋅∑upkeep modifiers)
One impactful upkeep modifier is the effect of subprime  on the specific pop.
Most values representing amenities are rounded to the closest integer value (the tie-breaking rule is unknown), except for amenities from pop jobs - it is rounded down.
The formula for available amenities or amenities deficit effect on a planet's  happiness ( stability for Gestalt empires) is not strictly linear, with less effect for extra amenities than missing amenities.
The formula for extra amenities (available amenities > 0 case) contributing to  happiness is:
happiness bonus=min(20%,20⋅⌊available amenities⌋⌊pop amenities usage⌋)
In other words, it scales from +0% with 0 available amenities, to +20% with twice as many available amenities as necessary.
The formula for a amenities deficit (available amenities < 0 case) affecting  happiness is:
happiness penalty=max(−50%,200/3⋅⌊available amenities⌋⌊pop amenities usage⌋)
In other words, it scales from +0% with 0 available amenities, to −50% when the planet has less than 25% of amenities needed.
Note: for readability reasons in the formulas above for the happiness effect as a function of amenities the rounding operations are noted as rounding down when in reality rounding to the nearest integer is used. The  stability bonus or penalty received by  Gestalt Consciousness empires from amenities in a colony by value is the same %-value a non-Gestalt empire gets in  happiness (the formulas above can be used).
Amenities can be affected on an empire-wide basis by the following:


Slavery
Entire species can be enslaved by giving them a certain citizenship, which opens a new tab in the Species Rights menu called  that determines what are the effects of slavery.

Grid amalgamation
Enslaved pops also use only  0.75 amenities and  0.75 housing per 100 pops, which can be further reduced by slavery type. They also have a  resettlement cost of just  50 energy. Enslaved pops cannot join factions and have only  25% political power, or 18.7% if a Slave Processing Facility is present on the planet. However, they can still increase  crime if they're too unhappy. Enslaved pops cannot demote to the  Civilian stratum unless the empire has the  Slaver Guilds or  Indentured Assets civic but they also cannot trigger unemployment events.
Low  stability is more dangerous when enslaved pops are present on a planet. Normally dangerous events can only occur if it's lower than 25, but if any pop is enslaved it should be kept above 40.
Slaves, workers and specialists
In addition to the slave resource output modifiers, worker resource output modifiers can also affect slaves in worker jobs. As of 3.0.1, slaves in specialist jobs are affected by specialist output modifiers, but not by slave resource output modifiers, if in Indentured Servitude.
Slaves working on  Miner jobs can benefit from  Worker resource output modifiers, such as  Authoritarian and  Strong.
If a modifier affects the resource output of both workers and slaves, it actually affects slaves in worker jobs twice.
The  Extended Shifts edict increases slaves resource output by +10% and workers resource output by +10%, resulting in an total +20% bonus to slaves in worker jobs.
Modifiers that affect workers aside from the resource output ones don't affect slaves.
The  Extended Shifts edict decreases slaves' happiness by −10% and worker happiness by −10%. It does not cause the slaves to suffer −20% happiness.
Robots
Robots are artificial pops and can be constructed once the required technology becomes available. They have the  Mechanical trait, alongside a broader set of climate preference traits that determines  habitability on different planet categories, rather than specific types. Robots can be given new traits via robo-modding, and the species template with the highest number of used trait points will be built by default. A different template can be specified for each planet.
The jobs a robot can have are limited by the highest robot technology researched. If an empire researches the  Artificial Administration technology with AI policy set to Servitude or Citizen Rights, all robots immediately become sapient.
If  Synthetic Dawn DLC is enabled and AI policy is set to Servitude, empires with either  Artificial Administration or  Sapient Combat Simulations technology have a risk of getting the  situation.
 Synthetic ascension allows a non-gestalt organic empire to turn all organic pops and leaders into synthetics. Completing it will permanently force the Citizen Rights policy.
 Hive Mind empires cannot build robots and will always purge all robots on their worlds.
 Machine pops are sapient and use  consumer goods upkeep as well as full housing and amenities usage regardless of AI policies.
Purges
 Purges represent the systematic elimination of specific species of pops from an empire.
Purging is done by setting a species'  citizenship to Undesirables.  Gestalt Consciousness pops in empires of a different authority are forced to be set as Undesirables, unless they can be  or the   is set to Sustain. Therefore, gaining planets from a Gestalt Consciousness empire means that the planet will be lost when it is empty of the conquered pops if there is not at least one non-gestalt pop on it. There are also three special cases:
Pre-sapients can only be purged if the   is not set to Protected and they are automatically purged if it's set to Extermination.
Robots are automatically purged if the   is set to Outlawed.
Synthetics can only be purged if the   is not set to Citizen Rights.
Having any species-wide purge is a negative issue for Xenophile , aside from the case of  Gestalt Consciousness pops and outlawed robots. The empire's founder species cannot be purged regardless of policies or if they are not the default species template.
There are multiple types of purge available, determined by the  Purge Type .
Purging pops gives empires for whom that species is their founding species a negative "Purged Our Species" opinion modifier towards the empire doing the purging (−0.25 per pop to a maximum of −1000) and everyone else the negative "Genocidal" opinion modifier (−0.5–0.15, depending on ethics and policies, to a maximum of −1000). An empire that doesn't know the purging is happening (because it isn't in contact with the purger or has no economic intel on them), or that doesn't care (including fallen and awakened empires other than a xenophile Awakened Empire), gets no opinion modifier. Synaptic Service purging only gives penalties when it happens on the Synaptic Lathe; when it happens elsewhere, the pop is moved to the Lathe rather than killed. Necrophage purging provokes smaller "Mysterious Disappearances" or "Necrophaged Our Species" penalties instead.
Refugees

Humanoid refugees
Pops from other empires may flee to escape purges, slavery, resettlement, crisis bombardment, or as a result of using the Land Appropriation policy or Expel Excess Population decision. Whether another empire is willing to accept those fleeing depends on its Refugees policy. Refugees will not head for empires where they have the Undesirables citizenship. Accepted refugee pops will get  +20 Happiness for 10 years and they will give  +10 Intel on the empire they escaped from.
Once refugees are generated they will head for any empire that will accept them with their Refugees policy following the following order:
 Habitability at least 70% and  housing at least 100
 Habitability at least 70%
 Habitability at least 50% and  housing at least 100
 Habitability at least 50%
 Habitability at least 20% and  housing at least 100
 Habitability at least 20%
 Housing at least 100
Any other world except a Synaptic Lathe
Pops that have the  Hive-Minded,  Nerve Stapled,  Zombie or  Suppressed traits cannot become refugees.
Demographics
Populations can grow or decline on a planet, based on several variables.
Pop growth
All pop groups on a planet grow and shrink simultaneously, determined by both the planet-wide logistic growth modifiers (more space and jobs is better) and the species-specific population counts (small populations are penalized).
For the purpose of calculating the "size" of a population, all pop groups under the same top-level species are combined together (merging strata, ethics, and subspecies). Small populations (less than 2000[?] pops) are penalized in growth. The Xeno-Compatibility perk changes this, instead combining all pops together, across species, to determine their growth penalty (entirely negating the penalty for most groups on any reasonably developed planet). Each species's total growth amount each month is then distributed between the pop groups, relative to their size. Any growth amount less than 1 is probabilistic: a 1.2 growth amount will result in 1 guaranteed pop growth, and a 20% chance of a second pop growth.
If all the jobs in a given strata are filled, any new pops from groups in that strata will start out unemployed, and either eventually demote to a strata with jobs (possibly the Civilian/Maintenance Drone strata, which contains unlimited "jobs"), or migrate to another planet with jobs.
Migration
Automatic migration occurs randomly for any unemployed pop groups. They will migrate to another random planet with available jobs and at least 40% [?] habitability. There are many hidden factors influencing the weights of the various migration targets, and if you have Migration Pacts with another empire, that empire's planets become valid migration targets as well (and their pops can migrate to your planets).
Growth weight
Pop assembly
Both biological pop assembly (from cloning) and mechanical pop assembly (from assembly) occur in addition to any natural biological pop growth. [Exact details TBD, but presumably all cloneable/assembleable species split the cloning/assembly growth, similar to natural growth.]
Pop decline
Pop decline represents the decrease of certain species on the planet due to purging or severe overcrowding. [DETAILS TBD]
If the Population Controls policy is set to Allowed, enslaved pops can be manually set to decline on a planet.
If a species is being purged, has the  Pathogenic Genes trait, or has the  Clone Soldier or  Clone Soldier Ascendant trait and insufficient Ancient Clone Vat buildings, it will always be set to decline.
