Discovery

For the  Discovery tradition tree, see  page.
Version

Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article. At least some were last verified for  4.1.

This article is for the PC version of Stellaris only.
List of discoveries

Discovery


 
Discoveries are unusual findings that warrant additional investigation by a  Scientist. The higher the scientist's level, the faster the discovery is investigated. There are two types of discoveries:  and . The  Astral Planes DLC adds a third type of discovery - . All three come in different levels of difficulty.
A few discoveries are located in  or created by origins, special projects, events or other discoveries, but the majority are randomly generated and can be found anywhere. When a science ship surveys a celestial object it may identify an anomaly or archaeological site. When the investigation of a discovery is complete, an event will pop up that can give various rewards, such as research points, resources, or even a special project which requires further research investment to unlock benefits. Certain Ethics occasionally have additional options when a discovery is investigated.
Archaeology sites are visible on the galaxy map and become grey when fully investigated. Anomalies are only visible on the system map or when hovering over the system on the galaxy map and disappear when fully investigated.
Contents





Uncovering discoveries
Each surveyed celestial object has a 5% base chance of spawning an anomaly, which is increased by 0.25% for every surveyed planet with no anomaly before being reset. The  Perfectionist trait,  Map The Stars edict and  Fear of the Dark origin each increase the base chance of finding anomalies by 10%. The chance to discover an anomaly rises to 50% by the 10th unsuccessful try with the base chance (5%), by the 4th try with the  Perfectionist trait or the  Map The Stars edict, and by the 3rd try with both of them.
Most archaeological sites are revealed by surveying, with a 1.23% chance of creating a site if the celestial object can support one. If a site is created this way, the chance to find the next one for this empire is reduced to 0.0246% for 5 years (a reduction of 80%). The AI controlled empires always have a lower chance of discovering archaeological sites (0.0246%) in comparison with the player's empire. Archaeological sites never spawn in a system with a trade value deposits (due to a workaround for a bug with minor artifact deposits).
Astral rifts can only appear after the mid-game year is reached. Each year there is a chance for an astral rift to spawn, and the longer it passes without one spawning the more likely it is for one to appear. Afterwards a limited number of astral rifts can also be created with the  Astral Splitting astral action. Multiple empires can discover the same astral rift but if an astral rift rewarded a relic another empire cannot discover the same rift.
Investigation
Anomalies are investigated in one sitting and do not require control of the system. The time to investigate an anomaly depends on the difference in level between the anomaly and the investigating  Scientist.
 Archaeological sites and  astral rifts have 1 to 7 chapters and require ownership of the system. Investigation proceeds in phases of 90 days. At the end of each phase, a die is rolled, with a random result from 1 to 10; adding the current number of clues and the scientist's Archaeology Skill or Astral Rift Skill and subtracting the chapter's difficulty gives the total result, as in the following formula:
Result=Die Roll+Scientist Skill + Bonus+Clues−Difficulty.
The scientist's skill is equal to the scientist's level, plus any modifiers from leader traits, including councilors and the  Curator Archaeology Lab technology.
A result of 14 or greater completes the current chapter; a result of 11-13 adds two clues for the next phase, a result of 6-10 adds one clue, a result of 5 or less adds no clues. The thresholds for astral rifts are reduced by 1: 10-13, 5-9, and 4 or less. A result of 5 or less can also trigger various events – depending on the archaeological site and chapter. These events can be helpful: add clues, give loot, even remove the  Substance Abuser leader trait (5% chance); or harmful: remove clues or even kill the scientist (~2.9% chance). Astral rifts do not have random events.
Completing the chapter gives the scientist 75 experience; finding two clues gives them 40 experience, one clue 25 experience. Even when finding no clues still gives the scientist 10 experience. Clues gained from events, however, do not automatically give experience.
If all events are to be avoided from the very start of the excavation, that is, starting with zero clues, in order to minimize the chance of losing the scientist, then having:
Archaeology Skill + Bonus - Difficulty ≥ 5 gives 0% chance of an event triggering;
Archaeology Skill + Bonus - Difficulty = 4 gives 10% chance of an event triggering;
Archaeology Skill + Bonus - Difficulty = 3 gives 20% chance of an event triggering;
Archaeology Skill + Bonus - Difficulty = 2 gives 30% chance of an event triggering, and so on.
Excavation of archaeological sites can be paused and resumed at any time with no penalty. If the system with the archaeological site is gained by another empire, that empire can continue the excavation from the current chapter, but cannot gain any rewards from already completed chapters. Exploration of astral rifts cannot be stopped once started.
Precursors

First League anomaly
The precursors are the oldest known galactic empires, though long dead. Their ruins are scattered across the galaxy to be discovered via anomalies or .
Every time a celestial object that is not a star is surveyed by an empire controlled by a human player, it has a chance to start a precursor events chain. 5 days after starting the chain, a pop-up screen will inform the player which precursor has been found. Once an empire has discovered their first precursor sign, they are locked into that precursor. DLC precursors have their own conditions for what celestial objects start their chain and thus it is possible to somewhat manipulate the precursor one gets by only surveying the relevant celestial objects.
The first empire that surveys most precursor homeworlds gains a large reward. If the  Ancient Relics DLC is enabled, empires that survey most precursor homeworlds, even if they weren't the first ones to do it, unlock a  to delve into the secrets of the precursor. The action costs 750  Minor Artifacts and unlocks a special project that provides a permanent reward when completed.
Precursors from the base game are explored via anomalies which spawn special projects. Each special project grants a small amount of  Engineering,  Physics or  Society research as well as a precursor artifact. 6 artifacts are required to reveal the location of a precursor's home system. If the  Ancient Relics DLC is enabled precursor anomalies also grant a small number of  Minor Artifacts and if the  Grand Archive DLC is enabled half of the precursor special project will grant a specimen. After 50 years have passed, a random event can add another precursor anomaly special project on an uninhabitable planet in the empire. Another event can have AI empires "sell" a discovered artifact to non-Gestalt empires for  1000 energy.  Corporate Dominion empires can counter with  500 energy. If the empire has the  Warrior Culture civic, it can threaten the AI empire to surrender it for free, the success rate depending on both empires' . Empires that have a Protective, Friendly or Loyal attitude offer the artifact for free instead of asking for payment. Each AI Empire can offer an artifact only once.
Ancient Relics precursors
Rather than through anomalies, the precursors in this DLC are found exclusively via archaeological sites. Each fully excavated site will reveal the location of the next archaeological site, until all of them are completed and the event chain ends. The sites are typically available only to the empire which revealed them.
Cosmic Storms precursors
Unlike with other DLCs, the precursors below are spawned by completing an initial anomaly as opposed to simply finding it, and they do not alert the player via a pop-up screen, making them easier to miss if the player does not recognize the anomalies' names.
Once the initial anomaly is investigated, it will spawn an archaeological site. Each fully excavated site will reveal the location of the next archaeological site, until all of them are completed and the event chain ends. The sites are typically available only to the empire which revealed them.
