Situations

Version

Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article. At least some were last verified for  3.14.

This article is for the PC version of Stellaris only.
Situations

Situations
Lists of situations



Not to be confused with 

A situation with many stages
Situations are events that take place gradually and are trackable via the Outliner and the . Most situations offer multiple approaches to tackle them, and most of the time an approach can be changed at any point.
Contents







































Situation mechanics
Situations are narrative or mechanical events that develop gradually rather than occurring immediately upon triggering. All situations have a progress bar, which typically goes from 0 to 100; most situations start at 0, but some situations start at other points along the progress bar. The progress bar is split into one or more stages, which often represent the increasing effects of the situation and may also trigger events when first entered. In addition to events triggered by entering a stage, situations may also have random monthly events.
Most situations have a base amount of monthly progress as well as one or more approaches, which can affect the monthly progress or apply other effects. Occasionally, an event can lock a situation, preventing its progress from changing, usually to force the player to make a choice or prevent an undesired possible interaction of effects from the situation stage changing. Situations automatically end when the progress bar reaches max progress ("complete") or goes below 0 ("fail"); it is also possible for a situation to end due to an event, project, or other reason. The end of a situation can be good, bad, neutral, or even nothing – depending on the situation and which end is reached.
Situations may have a target – usually a planet or empire – and the situation, stages, or approaches can apply modifiers to this target. The situation, stages, or approaches can also apply modifiers to the empire experiencing the situation.
Shortages
Shortages are situations that start if an empire's stored stockpile for a resource drops to 0 with negative income. Shortage situations progress as long as the empire has negative income and recede once a positive income is reached, or the stored stockpile is raised above zero some other way. Unlike most situations, the aim is to prevent the situation from making progress to avoid increasing empire penalties. All shortage situations have a Maintain Current Expenditures approach with no effects and one or two other approaches which attempt to alleviate the deficit by reducing expenses or increasing output of the resource.
If a shortage situation progresses completely, the empire defaults, refunding a large amount of resources based on how many decades have passed since game start and ending all current shortage situations. However, all upgraded buildings except capitals are downgraded to the lowest tier and all offensive armies and half of the empire's military ships are disbanded. In addition, the empire gains the Empire Defaulted modifier for 10 years, imparting the following effects:
 +25% All costs
 −50% Monthly influence
 −50% Monthly unity
 −25% Ship weapons damage
 −50% Pop demotion time
All shortage situations start at 15 progress and advance based on the ratio of expense to output, scaling from 0 if expense matches output up to +5 if expense is double or more of output. The shortage progress is reduced by −5 while income is positive and by −1 while the empire has a stockpile but negative income. Each stage takes 25 points to advance to the next stage. Progress gain is reduced by 50% on Cadet difficulty and by 90% on Civilian difficulty. Upon first reaching the final stage – Catastrophic Deficit, an event is triggered which have between one to three options to pay some cost in return for an infusion of the shortage resource; there is also an option to do nothing.  Payback empires may also receive an event for non-strategic resource deficits to gain 1000 of a basic resource or 500 of an advanced resource, or to refuse and gain  6x unity output (100~1000).
Strategic resource shortages are all similar, with their approaches and events having the same options differing only in the resource. Their deficit effects are similar as well, affecting  Resources from jobs as well as two other modifiers related to that resource.
Leviathan parade opportunities
Leviathan Parade Opportunities are situations that take place when a  has been defeated. The parade occurs on the planet with the highest population in the empire that has not hosted a parade in the last 40 years. If no such planet is available, the planet with the largest population is chosen. Reaching the second stage of a situation brings multiple choices with various effects. When the situation completes, the parade planet gains a permanent modifier and the empire gains either a small (150 ~ 100000), standard (250 ~ 1000000), or large (350 ~ 1000000) amount of  unity.  Memorialists start with the large reward, all other empires start with the standard reward.
All Leviathan parade opportunity situations have three stages and offer three approaches:
Encourage it – +6 monthly progress
Discourage it – −4 monthly progress
Reorganize – 0 monthly progress; costs  1000 Unity to activate and unlocks the Relocate the Parade planetary 
Reorganize can only be selected if current progress is below 50 and monthly progress is positive. Once this approach is selected, the other approaches cannot be selected until the Parade has been moved to a new planet.
Horrific Inverse Mass
The Worm, Dimensional Horror, and Elder One all share this situation. Killing one begins this situation, and killing another does not award another situation. The second stage choices are:
End the situation for  250~1000000 unity:  not available for  Materialist
Increase  unity reward, with different versions for  Spiritualist (deify) and non-Spiritualist (study)
Contain the mass
Upon completion of the situation, if the mass was deified, the parade planet gains  +15% unity from jobs, otherwise it gains  +15% research from jobs. Seven years after completion (14 if the mass was contained), another event fires with two choices:
Increase the modifier's bonus to +25%, but also add  −20 stability
Remove the modifier
If the modifier is kept, about 3.5 years later, a third event fires with two options:
Gain  10 devastation and replace the previous modifier with the TOO LATE modifier, which gives  +100% research and  +100% unity from jobs,  −20 stability,  −200 immigration pull, and  −1000% governing ethics attraction.
Gain  99 devastation and remove the previous modifier:  not available for  Fanatic Materialists
If the first option is chosen, the event sets a random outcome and triggers a final event two years later. The final event either destroys the parade planet (66% chance), turning it into a black hole, or replaces the TOO LATE modifier with the Horrific Inverse Mass Stabilized planet modifier (33% chance), giving  +50% research and  +50% unity from jobs. Because the outcome is decided prior to the previous event, reloading a save at this point cannot alter the result, only changing the flags does. This can be done either with save editing or by running the following commands with the planet selected:
effect remove_planet_flag = black_hole_horror
effect set_planet_flag = stabilized_horror
Event situations
Event situations have a small chance to trigger at regular intervals and can only happen once. Various events can take place during an event situation. Event situations on a colony cannot occur on a homeworld or capital, or if the colony is occupied, has ground combat, or is not owned by its original colonizer, except as specifically noted on a situation.
Gravity Well
This situation can occur on any  Star Fortress or Citadel with a  Black Hole Observatory. The situation starts at 25 progress and increases by +5 monthly; it ends by reaching either 100 or 0 progress. The starting event prompts the player to choose the initial approach, either Retreat, Maintain Orbit, or Advance. This approach can be changed at any time unless there is an ongoing mutiny on the starbase. Retreat costs  10 energy and reduces progress by −10 monthly. Maintain Orbit costs  5 energy and reduces progress by −3 monthly. Advance increases progress by 3 monthly.
There are four stages to the Gravity Well situation, representing the approximate distance from the black hole's event horizon. Each stage provides increasing amounts of  dark matter and  physics research, but also increases the rate of progress, making it more likely for the starbase to be irretrievably caught by the black hole. The first stage, Static Limit, lasts until 50 progress; the second, Ergosphere, until 70 progress; the third, Accretion Disk, until 80 progress. When first entering the fourth and final stage, Point of No Return, the player receives a notification event as well.
There are five random events that can occur during this situation:
Mutiny (advance): Locks approach to Advance for about one month; cannot occur for  Gestalt Consciousness empires, weight doubled with  Technocracy civic
Mutiny (retreat): Locks approach to Retreat for about one month; cannot occur for  Gestalt Consciousness empires
Adds +10 progress; cannot occur in fourth stage
 18x physics output (350~100 000)
Option to destroy all starbase buildings to reduce progress by −30 (70% chance) or −10 (30% chance); weight ×6 in third stage and ×4 in fourth stage
If the situation reaches 100, the starbase is destroyed and  Individualist empires lose  −100 influence;  Gestalt Consciousness empires can choose that option, or to observe the end and gain  24x physics output (500~1 000 000) and a permanent empire modifier, with a equal chance of either Transcended Consciousness (+5% monthly unity) or Disjointed Consciousness (−5% monthly unity). Empires with  Divided Attention,  Subspace Ephapse, or  Delegated Functions have an increased chance for Transcended Consciousness, while empires with  One Mind or  Unitary Cohesion have an increased chance for Disjointed Consciousness.
If the situation goes below 0, the starbase returns to a stable orbit, and empire has an equal chance to receive either  48x physics output (1000~1 000 000) or a level 6  scientist of the primary species with  Maniacal and  Expertise: Field Manipulation.
The Mysterious Labyrinth
This situation can occur on a colony four or five years after it is founded; it cannot occur on  Tomb Worlds,  Habitats, or  Ring Worlds. When the situation starts, the player is prompted to choose either to explore its interior or to monitor it from afar. The situation starts at 50 progress and increases or decreases depending on the approach taken. There are three approaches for this situation, they can be changed at any time.
1. Explore its Interior: initially costs  5 energy and adds +2.5 progress monthly
2a. Monitor it from Afar: adds −2.5 progress monthly, is later replaced by:
2b. Quarantine it: initially costs  10 energy and adds −2.5 progress monthly
3. Destroy it: initially costs  10 energy and adds −5 progress monthly
Unlike other situations, instead of one series of stages, this situation has two series, one to the left and one to the right, representing progress towards the different approaches that can be taken. The left stages represent ignoring or destroying the labyrinth and the right stages represent exploring it. The first time the progress bar reaches a stage, an event is triggered. Re-entering a stage does not trigger a second event and there are no random monthly events.
Left stage events
Surprising Movements: Replaces Monitor it from Afar with Quarantine it and prompts the player to choose an approach
Labyrinth Destroyed: the labyrinth is destroyed; the situation ends and the empire gains +200  dark matter and +800 each of  exotic gases,  rare crystals, and  volatile motes
Attention Seeking: increases the monthly cost of both Quarantine it and Destroy it by  10 unity
A Reward for Obstinance: adds the  Space-Time Anomaly feature to the colony
Labyrinth Disappeared: gain  18x unity output (250~1 000 000) – only possible if the situation ends after 21 months have passed, then equal chance of Labyrinth Disappeared and A Reward for Obstinance
Right stage events
Expedition Report: Flavor only event
Continued Perplexity: increases the monthly cost of Explore its Interior by  10 unity
A Departure: adds the  Space-Time Anomaly feature to the colony
A Turbulent Departure: adds the Space-Time Anomaly feature as well as one  City Ruins, one  Deep Sinkhole, and two  Active Volcano blockers – only possible if the situation ends before 21 months have passed, then an equal chance of A Turbulent Departure and A Departure
Unusual Snow
This situation can occur on a  desert colony four or five years after it is founded, and it progresses steadily at +5 monthly progress. Stage I lasts until 25 progress points, and then the player is prompted to choose either to Observe or Melt the snow. Observing the snow costs  −10 unity monthly and gives  +5 research, while melting the snow costs  −10 energy monthly and gives the colony  +10 stability.
Up to two of three random events can happen during stage II:
Gain  24x society output (500~1 000 000)
Increase the monthly cost of observing by  −5 unity
Either increase the monthly cost of melting by  −5 energy and add +5 more monthly progess while melting, or reduce the  stability gained by melting to +5.
The second and third event are mutually exclusive. Stage II lasts until 80 progress points, at which the point the player is given one last chance to change approaches after which it is no longer possible to change the approach.
When the situation completes, if the player was observing the snow, they can choose to add the  Living Snow Reserve feature, which gives  +20% physics and  +20% society from jobs and  −2 max districts, or to fight an invasion of 6 Living Snow Warrior armies. If the player was melting the snow, they must fight the invasion of 6 Living Snow Warrior armies. If the invaders win and the colony is not recaptured within 5~6 years, it becomes a  Frozen World with a deposit of  +8 physics and  +8 society research and adds 10% research progress to the  Terrestrial Sculpting technology.
Geomagnetic Storm
This situation can occur on any colony owned by a  Machine Intelligence 25 years after it is founded if half or more of the pops on the colony are  machine drones. Before the situation starts, the player must choose to shield all drones, simple drones, complex drones, or no drones at a cost of  1 energy per shielded drone. This choice also determines the initial approach and starting progress (0-5) for the situation. This situation progresses steadily at +5 monthly progess, however shielding all or some drones reduces the progress by up to −5, scaled by the percentage of drones shielded. The situation ends either by reaching 100 progress or after 60 months. It is possible to reduce progress slightly through a random event, but generally, the progress of this situation only increases or remains the same.
Shortly after the situation begins,  Rogue Servitors receive the option to gain a  Organic-Machine Interface Center feature, which adds  +1 Bio-Assistant job and +1 more per 20  pops. After the situation ends, the Organic-Machine Interface Center feature is removed and the player can choose to gain  1000 alloys or add the  Organic-Machine Interface Museum planet modifier, which gives  +5% unity from  Bio-Trophy jobs.
The Geomagnetic Storm has three stages, representing increasing amounts of radiation damage: the first lasts until 40 progress and the second until 70 progress. Both  Menial and  Complex Drones have their output reduced, and at the later stages, the planet's  stability is significantly reduced and even the whole empire's  monthly unity is impacted. The effects of each stage are shown in the table to the right.
There are four approaches for this situation: Shield All Drones, Shield Simple Drones, Shield Complex Drones, or No Shielding; each approach has an upkeep of  1 energy per shielded drone. Additionally, drones that are shielded receive +20% output, offsetting the penalty from the stages. As noted above, the percentage of shielded drones reduces the monthly progress, up to −5 when all drones are shielded.
There are four random events that can occur during this situation.
If there are any unshielded drones, the player can kill a random robotic pop, add +5 progress, or subtract −5 progress.
If there is a  Machine Assembly Plants or  Machine Assembly Complex, the player can spend  300 energy or gain  −10% mechanical pop assembly speed for 90 days.
Lose 200 food, energy, minerals, or alloys; if the planet has any  Bio-Assistants, there is a 75% chance to instead gain 200 food, energy or minerals, or 500 alloys.
A random robotic pop disappears, then reappears 15-105 days later, when the player can choose to scrap them for  500 alloys or reboot them, creating a new primary species pop, with a 30% chance of adding  Enhanced Memory to the pop, otherwise adding  High Bandwidth to the pop.
If the situation reaches 100 progress, all robotic pops on the colony are killed; if instead 60 months pass first, the end result depends on the current stage:
Radiation damage: minimal:  18x engineering output (350~100 000) and the permanent empire modifier Radiation-Hardened Components, which gives  +5% research speed and  +5% monthly unity
Radiation damage: medium:  24x engineering output (500~1 000 000)
Radiation damage: high: Gain the empire modifier Software Damage for five years, which gives  −5% research speed and  −5% monthly unity
The Kaleidoscope
This situation has a 30% chance of happening. The flag is set at galaxy generation. Anytime after the mid-game start, a random empire whose capital does not have a Planetary Shield Generator receives planet modifier on the capital Global Power Outage:  −2000% resources from jobs, and a special project requiring a construction ship. Other empires that have at least  low intel on the affected planet receive a notice of the Kaleidoscope. Finishing the special project removes the Global Power Outage modifier and starts the situation and sets the initial approach.
The situation starts at 0 progress and ends when it reaches 100, or 25 years after the Kaleidoscope first appeared, when it dies. The Kaleidoscope also has a "mood" from 0 to 21; while the mood is 5 or less, it is "angry", and while it is 15 or more, it is "happy"; in-between is "neutral". The Kaleidoscope's visual appearance changes based on its mood. It starts at 10 mood. There are three approaches which can be changed at any time:
While the situation is active, there are a number of random events that can occur, at most one per year. The likelihood of negative vs. positive events is affected by the current mood value, with lower mood shifting more towards negative and higher mood more towards positive.
Negative events
Minor Infestation – Approach is Do not feed it and any owned planet has a Generator District; planet gains Phantom Load modifier:  −2000% energy from jobs, and a special project to remove the modifier.
Electroshock – Approach is not Overfeed it and any owned planet has an Energy Grid or Energy Nexus; choice of: add +5 progress and ruin the Energy Grid or Energy Nexus, or gain  1000 energy.
Unnerving Patterns – Approach is Do not feed it and empire is not  Machine Intelligence; adds Unnerving Patterns modifier to situation:  −5 stability.
Ominous Patterns – Approach is Do not feed it and empire is  Spiritualist; choice of: spend  2000 energy, or adds Ominous Patterns modifier to situation:  −10% happiness.
Pilfering Patterns – Approach is Do not feed it; adds Haunting Patterns modifier to situation:  −10% ship speed.
Positive events
Soothing Patterns – Approach is not Do not feed it; gain  18x unity output (250~1 000 000) and adds Soothing Patterns modifier to situation:  +5 stability, for 2 years.
Dazzling Patterns – Approach is not Do not feed it; gain  24x physics output (500~1 000 000) and adds Dazzling Patterns modifier to situation:  +10 immigration pull, for 2 years.
Endless Hunger – Approach is not Do not feed it and empire is not Xenophobe and owns a complete ; can choose to upgrade a completed Dyson Sphere into a Wonder Sphere, doing so while the situation is active ends the situation.
The empire with this situation can use the operation  on an empire whose capital does not have a Planetary Shield Generator and which did not use this operation previously. A successful operation transfers the situation to the targeted empire, including the current progress and mood. Additionally, if the empire with this situation is entirely destroyed by another, the destroying empire inherits this situation if their capital does not have a Planetary Shield Generator, otherwise the situation ends with no effect.
If the situation reaches 100 progress, there are two possible outcomes:
Blooming Kaleidoscope – base chance 10%: gain the   relic.
Exploding Kaleidoscope – base chance 90%: all colonies in the capital system gain  50 devastation.
The chance of each is heavily influenced by the Kaleidoscope's mood; each point of mood shifts the chance by 4%. For example, at 10 mood, each outcome has a 50% chance of occurring.
Triggered situations
Unlike event situations, triggered situations are directly related to another event, decision, or similar circumstance. They may be repeatable if their triggering circumstance is repeatable.
Plight of the Beta-Universe
This situation is a possible outcome of the  colony event. This situation cannot occur if the empire's homeworld is artificial, an Ecumenopolis, Hive, Machine, or Relic world, or owned by a different empire. After completing the special project, a series of events occurs over a few years, culminating in an attack by a parallel universe version of the empire. After the invading fleet is defeated, the parallel version of the empire asks for help as their universe is collapsing. The player is prompted to choose between studying, plundering, or aiding the "beta" empire; this choice sets the initial approach. Choosing to aid the beta empire at this point locks the player into that approach.
The situation starts at 75 progress and ends when the situation reaches 100, at which point the beta empire is destroyed, or when it goes below 0, at which point the beta empire homeworld is pulled into the player's home system as an owned colony. The situation also ends if the player loses ownership of their homeworld.
The situation progresses at a base of +3. Each year since the situation started adds +1 monthly progress; after 5 years, it adds +10 monthly progress instead. Aiding the beta empire subtracts −7 monthly progress.
There are three approaches for this situation:
Bring <Homeworld>-Beta to our universe: Costs  45 energy and adds  −10% research output for the empire.
Observe the decay of the Beta-Universe: Adds  +40% physics output for the empire.
Plunder <Homeworld>-Beta: Adds  +35 alloys,  +50 minerals, and  +25 energy monthly; also adds  +30 food monthly if the empire uses food.
There are four stages and the situation starts in the third stage. The first time entering any other stage triggers an event. Other than One Last Plea, the approach must be Bring <Homeworld>-Beta to our universe to trigger the event.
Events
One Last Plea – the player can choose to redouble their efforts to save the beta empire, which subtracts −3 more monthly from the situation progress. If the current approach was not Bring <Homeworld>-Beta to our universe, choosing to redouble efforts sets and locks that approach as the only option. Redoubling efforts also increases the effect of Bring <Homeworld>-Beta to our universe to  −30% research output for the empire.
Crossing the Dimensional Border – gain  +15 stability on the homeworld for 5 years and +20 situation progress, gain +5 situation progress, or gain  −10 stability and  −50% governing ethics attraction on the homeworld for 5 years, not available to  Egalitarians.
Offloading Optimization – gain  +20% menial drone resource output and +20 situation progress or gain −5 situation progress.
Mission: Dimensional – pay  150 unity, not available with  Barbaric Despoilers or  Nihilistic Acquisition, or gain +20 situation progress and  +10% unity from jobs on the homeworld and repeat this event in four months; the second time, pay  150 unity, or gain +45 situation progress and increase the  unity from jobs to +30%, and repeat this event in four months; every following time, not paying adds +20 situation progress.
Desperate Drones – the beta empire attacks with a basic army, three if the offloaded optimization was taken earlier; kill one pop and gain four armies and +20 situation progress, or do nothing and gain +15 situation progress; after defeating the attacking armies, threaten the beta empire or, if the player chose to do nothing, gain −15 situation progress. If the attacking armies occupy the homeworld, remove the offloaded optimization modifier, set the situation approach to Bring <Homeworld>-Beta to our universe, and add +15 situation progress.
If the beta empire's planet is saved, it generally matches the player empire's homeworld at the start of the game, with  Ocean Paradise,  Life-Seeded, and  Post-Apocalyptic each getting their special planet; other origins receive a size 18 planet that matches their original planet type. The beta homeworld has 18 pops of the empire's primary species with the trait  Not of this World.
Infested Star
This situation is started by the  nine months after its conclusion. Three months after the operation concludes all capital system colonies gain the  Low Solar Output modifier, which gives  −5% energy from jobs and  −5% habitability; six months after that, the  Low Solar Output modifier increases to −10% and  −5 stability and the situation begins.
This situation starts at 0 and progresses at +3 monthly. Initially, there is only one approach, Search for a Cure, which reduces monthly progress by −1. The first stage lasts until 20 progress, at which point the  Low Solar Output modifier increases to  −20% energy from jobs,  −20% habitability, and  −10 stability. The second stage lasts until 50 progress, then a special project to find the cure is created on the capital star. If the empire has more than 40% higher decryption than the infesting empire at this point, they learn the other's identity. The special project requires a  scientist on a science ship and takes 15 months to complete, which means that the situation will progress at least to 80 before a cure can be found.
When the special project is completed, a second approach – Cure the Star – becomes available, which reduces monthly progress by −10, quickly reversing the situation's progress. AI empires who have less than 25% of their empire's pops on the capital world do not use this approach and instead let the star be consumed. Reaching 0 progress removes all versions of the Low Solar Output modifier and ends the situation. Reaching 100 progress turns the capital system's primary star into a Brown Dwarf, destroys all colonies in the system, and turns all system planets into  Frozen Worlds. If the empire had discovered the identity of the infesting empire, it gains the  Ate Our Star total war casus belli against that empire for 20 years.
Water Contamination
This situation is started by the Voidspawn Parade Opportunity situation. The situation begins at 0 progress and has two approaches:
Clean it: reduces  Worker and  Menial Drone output by −5% and adds +6 progress monthly
Study it: reduces  Specialist and  Complex Drone output by −5% and adds  +15 society research and +4 progress monthly
Completing the situation removes the  Voidspawn Contaminant modifier and, if the Voidspawn Parade Opportunity situation is still on-going, increases the  unity reward.
A Rift in Space
This situation is triggered the first time an empire without the  Rift Sphere technology has an  in its space. If the empire has the  Riftworld origin, the situation is named Reaching into the Rift instead. The situation has two stages that each take 50 progress to complete. When the situation completes, the empire gains  100 astral threads and 25% progress on the Rift Sphere technology. If the empire gains the Rift Sphere technology some other way, the situation ends with no effect. If the empire owns no astral rifts, the situation is locked with no progress until another astral rift is gained.
There are three approaches for this situation:
Study Passively – +0.5 progress monthly
Devote Research – +1.2 progress monthly;  +10% unity output and  physics output is reduced: −25% in stage I, −50% in stage II.
Send Probes – +1.2 progress monthly;  +25% unity and  +10% physics output, and  alloys output is reduced: −25% in stage I, −50% in stage II.
Using either Devote Research or Send Probes for at least two months in a row sets a flag which triggers the event Unstable Spacetime once stage 2 starts. There are three versions which are equally likely. Initially, there is a 16% chance of the event not firing immediately but being checked again after one year, and once the situation reaches 80 progress, some version of the event will occur when the next check happens. The three versions are:
A new planet is created in the astral rift system with a  empire.
A new random species is created on the nearest colony.
The nearest colony gains the modifier Temporal Distortions for one year: +100%  resources from jobs,  pop growth speed,  pop assembly speed, and  building build speed.
The Crystal Sphere
The Crystal Sphere can appear after the mid-game year if any empire has completed five or more . An event checks once each year for eligible empires and the eligible empire that has completed the most astral rifts gains the Crystal Sphere in the eligible system nearest to its capital, including the capital system. That empire can choose to either study or destroy the Crystal Sphere, starting the situation of that type. Once the Crystal Sphere is spawned, any other empire can start either situation by gaining ownership of that system. When ownership of the Crystal Sphere changes, all progress in the situation is reset.
Empire eligibility is determined as follows:
Has researched  Rift Sphere
Has completed 5 or more astral rifts
Owns an eligible system
A formula which compares the number of completed astral rifts, the game year, and a random ranking
All empires are given a random rank from 0-100, with AI empires having their rank doubled and  Riftworld origin empires having theirs halved. The random ranking is rerolled each year.
System eligibility is determined as follows:
Does not have a 
Does not have a shroud tunnel
Is not the Sol system
Both versions of the situation have a single stage which takes 100 progress to complete. Neither can progress if the empire does not have the Rift Sphere technology.
Destroy the Crystal Sphere
This version of the situation has two approaches:
Mechanical Approach – +0.8 progress monthly
Astral Approach – +1.2 progress and  −10 astral threads monthly, and  +20% research output; requires 10 astral threads stored to activate
Completing the situation gives  100 astral threads,  500 exotic gases,  500 rare crystals, and the empire modifier Peace in This Dimension for 10 years:  +10% happiness.  Xenophobe and  genocidal empires also gain  24x unity output (350~1 000 000).
Study the Crystal Sphere
This version of the situation has three approaches:
Observe and Report – +0.8 progress monthly
Mundane Method – +1.2 progress monthly and −10%  physics and  engineering output
Astral Method – +1.2 progress and  −10 astral threads monthly, and  +20% research output; requires 10 astral threads stored to activate
Completing the situation spawns the .
The Seal
This situation starts by completing the Crystal Rift, exploring the system azilash, and defeating the 8 Aberrant fleets there. The situation has a single stage which takes 100 progress to complete. Each year while the situation is active, another Aberrant fleet is spawned. Until each fleet is destroyed, no progress can be gained unless current progress is already 95 or more. Each time all Aberrant fleets are destroyed, the situation gains +5 progress.
There are three approaches for this situation:
Do Nothing – +0.8 progress monthly
Weave Astral Fabric – +1.4 progress and  −10 astral threads monthly, and all fleets and stations in the azilash system gain  +50% shield; requires 10 astral threads stored to activate
Pump Exotic Gases – +1.2 progress and  −50 exotic gases monthly, and all fleets and stations in the azilash system gain  +10% energy weapon damage; requires 50 exotic gases stored to activate.
The situation ends if the Formless become hostile to the empire or if the Formless dimensional anchor is destroyed. If the dimensional anchor is destroyed, this also grants the empire with the situation  18x physics output (250~5000) and destroys the azilash system. To prevent the destruction of the anchor, you can supply the Formless with  100 Astral Threads, making them spawn a defense fleet composed of 10 extradimensional cruisers.
When the situation is completed: the azilash system gains a size 40 Gaia World with the  Formless Haven modifier and brings the following 3 options.
Gain the zadigal legendary paragon and every 10 years the empire can choose an additional reward: a fleet of 16 extradimensional cruisers,  100 Astral Threads or a random  Physics technology (or a very large amount of  Physics if all technologies are already researched). If the Unbidden, Aberrant or Vehement are present in the galaxy the Formless can be asked for a +10% damage boost in exchange for  2000 Astral Threads. The cost must be paid separately for each extradimensional invaders faction.
Demand subjugation. The chance of success is 75% and increases with every astral rift explored. If the Formless accept, they colonize the Gaia World and become a  Luminarium subject and the empire gains the  Eternal Throne relic. The Formless start with  −100 Loyalty but have high growth for it. If a starbase was already constructed in azilash, the Formless gain control of it. If they refuse subjugation, they become hostile.
Become hostile towards the Formless. They gain 2 fleets of 32 cruisers each. If the Formless are defeated, the empire gains the  Eternal Throne relic and  1000 Astral Threads. This is the only option for  Genocidal empires.
Extract Nanites from Planet

This situation is started by the , available to empires that have adopted the  Unbridled Consumption Nanotech tradition. It starts at 0 progress and completes at 1000 progress. It progresses according to the number of available districts on the planet, namely  planet size minus the number of Nanite Harvest Basin  present when the decision is taken. The more available districts, the slower it progresses so that the situation lasts 6 months per available district.
The situation can be stopped at any point by choosing the approach Restraint at a cost of  1000 unity.
Each year, the world is partially subsumed. This adds two  Nanite Harvest Basin blockers and  10 devastation. It also randomly gives  2x or 3x nanites output (100 ~ 2000). If there is only one available district remaining, this instead adds one blocker,  5 devastation, and  1x nanites output (100 ~ 1000). When the situation completes, this process is repeated twice and the planet is turned into a  Nanite world.
Gather the Storm
Empires with the  Galactic Weather Control ascension perk can start this situation by using the science ship action Initiate Galactic Storm on any star. The science ship must remain in the same system performing the action until the situation completes or the situation aborts with no effect. It has two stages, which each take 50 progress. Monthly progress is +1, except with the approach Supercharge the Star which has +2 monthly progress instead.
When the situation starts, it fires an event that sets the initial approach. The approach cannot be changed once set.
Supercharge the Star – Costs  200 energy monthly
Oversaturate the Star – Costs  100 minerals monthly
Requires any of the following:
 Multi-Dimensional Studies and  volatile motes
 Hyperspace Slipstreams and  rare crystals
 Dark Matter Drawing
Entering the second stage fires another event that sets the final approach, which determines what type of storm is generated. The approach cannot be changed once set.
If the initial approach was Supercharge, the following approaches can be selected:
Redirect Solar Winds – Costs  50 alloys monthly; creates a Radiant Storm
Electrify the Storm – Costs  200 energy monthly; creates an Electric Storm; requires  Quantum Field Manipulation
Magnatize Ions – Costs  100 minerals monthly; creates a Magnetic Storm; requires  Mineral Isolation
If the initial approach was Oversaturate, the following approaches can be selected:
Agitate Particles – Costs  5 volatile motes monthly; creates a Particle Storm; requires  Multi-Dimensional Studies and  volatile motes
Electrify the Storm – Costs  5 dark matter monthly; creates a Gravity Storm; requires  Dark Matter Drawing
Magnatize Ions – Costs  5 rare crystals monthly; creates a Stardust Storm; requires  Hyperspace Slipstreams and  rare crystals
The selected type of storm is created when the situation completes.
The situation can be aborted in either event or at any time by selecting the approach Abort the Project.
Shroudwalker Insight
This situation is started by purchasing the Shroudwalker Insight from the , targeting an empire selected from the options then. It has a single stage and approach, each with no effects. The base monthly progress is +12.5 and this can be multiplied by ×2 by having either  Teachers of the Shroud or  Mind over Matter.
When the situation completes, it has one of four random effects:
40% – Create a random asset from the target
25% – Gain  +15 infiltration on the target
25% – Gain  +20 intel on the target
10% – No effect
Sign of the Locus

This situation is started by purchasing the Shroudwalker Divination from the . It has a single stage and approach, each with no effects. The base monthly progress is +2 and this is modified by the factors in the table to the right.
While the situation is active, each month there is a 47% chance of triggering a divination event chain. Only one event chain can happen per situation, and each event chain has certain other conditions that must be met for it to begin. If the situation reaches 90 progress before an event chain has begun, the game tries each month to start an event chain, and if the situation completes without any event chain firing, the empire is refunded  1000 energy.
There are nine possible event chains for the Sign of the Locus, none of them can repeat in later situations:
All Too Lucid – a random, non-capital colony gains  −20% happiness and  +25 crime; this can be studied which replaces the modifier with −35 crime and +200% unity from jobs for 10 years, or cracked down on which first replaces the modifier with −20% happiness, −25 crime, and −25 stability, then increases that with −50% unity from jobs, which lasts for 10 years, and also adds the Martial Law modifier for 10 years (same effects as the ).
Shrouded – a random science ship and its leader are lost to the shroud, and a special project to investigate is added; completing the project costs  1000 physics research and gives  12x physics output (250~100 000) and returns the lost ship and leader.
A Rupture in Orbit – a random, non-capital colony gains the Orbital Rupture special project
Completing the project turns any uninhabitable moons into shrouded worlds and gives a choice to further research or back off; backing off adds  −20% pop growth from immigration and  +20 emigration push for 30 years, or  −10 deviancy for 15 years if  Gestalt Consciousness, and −5 monthly progress for the situation; further researching adds +5 monthly progress for the situation and gives an option to gain a governor and colony ship, have them depart, or attack
Failing or canceling the special project adds  +5 devastation and  +30 crime; soon after, a  pop dies, another +5 devastation is added, and a choice of waiting it out, spending 800 consumer goods to replace the modifier with +10% pop consumer goods upkeep for two years, or locking down the planet to replace the modifier with −20 crime, −20% resources from jobs, −80% pop growth from immigration, and  +1 soldier job for two years,  Hive Minds' lockdown costs  15 influence and gives −20 deviancy, −20% resources from jobs, −50% pop growth from immigration, and  +1 warrior drone;  Machine Intelligences have the same except without the  deviancy reduction; finally one to two years later the final event removes all modifiers, if the empire chose to wait it out, all pops on the planet gain Survivor of the Psionic Frontier which gives  +30% happiness and  −30% amenities usage.
Floating Shell – issues a special project to investigate the shell; completing the project costs  1000 engineering research and gives  12x engineering output (250~100 000) and +25% progress to the next armor tech; soon after another gain  12x engineering output (250~100 000), then another special project; completing that project costs another  1000 engineering research and gives a choice of  +750 alloys or a unique cruiser with a Psi-Jump Drive.
, if not previously triggered
, if not previously triggered
, if not previously triggered
, if not previously triggered
, if not previously triggered
Sign of the Visitor

This situation is started by purchasing the Shroudwalker Divination from the . It has a single stage and approach, each with no effects. The base monthly progress is +2 and this is modified by the factors in the table to the right
While the situation is active, each month there is a 47% chance of triggering a divination event chain. Only one event chain can happen per situation, and each event chain has certain other conditions that must be met for it to begin. If the situation reaches 90 progress before an event chain has begun, the game tries each month to start an event chain, and if the situation completes without any event chain firing, the empire is refunded  1000 energy.
There are nine possible event chains for the Sign of the Visitor:
Flocks of Cloud – , only for members of  Galactic Unions or  Research Cooperatives which haven't completed this joint operation previously
, only if another country is harming relations with the empire
Rogue Shaman – a random, non-capital colony receives an exile from the Shroud-Touched Coven enclave; refusing the exile gives the colony  −10 stability and  +10% crime for 2 years, accepting gives the colony  +10% happiness and  +5% monthly unity.
The Great Schism – a random, non-capital colony receives exiles from the Shroud-Touched Coven enclave; refusing them adds  +10 opinion with the enclave, accepting them gives an option to spend 500 energy and 50 rare crystals to fashion a "key": refusing to pay adds −10% happiness to the colony, while paying has a equal chance of either +10% happiness and +20 stability or −10% happiness and −20 stability.
, if not previously triggered
 colony event, if not previously triggered
, if not previously triggered
Hero Redivivus – issues a special project on the homeworld to investigate the hero; upon completion adds  +20% happiness,  +10% monthly unity, and  140% pacifist attraction to the homeworld.
Wayward Pilgrims – pilgrims ask for aid: spending 2000 food and 50 influence, then 1000 energy and 50 influence adds  +10% happiness,  +5% monthly unity, and  150% spiritualist attraction to the empire for three years; refusing at any point adds  −20 ship tracking to the empire for three years.
Only the A Most Irritating Envoy event chain can be repeated in later situations, all other chains can only occur once.
Civic situations
The following situations only occur for empires with certain .
Consume World

This situation is triggered by the  Consume World decision taken by a  Terravore empire. It starts at 0 progress and completes at 1000 progress. It progresses according to the number of available districts on the planet, namely  planet size minus the number of  Lithoid Devastation blockers present when the decision is taken. The more available districts, the slower it progresses so that the situation lasts 6 months per available district.
The situation can be stopped at any point by choosing the approach Restraint at a cost of  1000 unity.
Each year, the world is partially consumed. This removes a random constructed district, adds two  Lithoid Devastation blockers and  20 devastation. It also randomly creates a primary species pop, gives  5x minerals output (100 ~ 1000), or  3x alloys output (100 ~ 1000). If there is only one available district remaining, this instead adds one blocker,  10 devastation, and  3x minerals output (100 ~ 1000). When the situation completes, this process is repeated for any remaining districts, all pops remaining on the planet are resettled to the capital and the planet is turned into a shattered world.
Environmental Deterioration
This situation can occur once per game for a 
 Relentless Industrialists
 empire. It is triggered approximately 30 years after a  Coordinated Fulfillment Center or  Universal Productivity Alignment Facility is constructed on a non-Tomb, Relic, or Ecumenopolis world. The situation starts at 50 progress and ends either by reaching 0 or 100 progress. It also ends with no effect if the empire no longer has the civic.
There are three stages to this situation: from 0 to 50 has no effect, from 50 to 80 gives  −10 stability to the colony, and from 80 to 100 gives  −20 stability to the colony. Reaching the third stage prevents switching approaches and fires a narrative event. It also has a 20% chance to set a situation flag which removes the stability penalty from this stage; if the empire has good habitability on Tomb Worlds, this flag is guaranteed.
There are three approaches for this situation:
Take No Action – The situation progress at +2.5 monthly towards 100
Launch Cleanup Efforts – The situation progresses at −2.5 monthly towards 0; adds  +100% upkeep for pops and buildings on the colony
Embrace Change – The situation progresses at +2.5 monthly towards 100; costs  10 research monthly upkeep
Reaching 100 terraforms the planet into a  Tomb World. If the Take No Action approach is in effect and the situation flag in stage three was not set, the colony gains the Environmental Deterioration modifier, adding  −20 stability for 10 years; if this happens, any future colonies terraformed by having a Coordinated Fulfillment Center or Universal Productivity Alignment Facility gain the same modifier for 10 years. Reaching 0 prevents the world from being terraformed.
Reaching either 0 or 100 unlocks the  Industrialism policy, with the initial option selected based on the approach in effect when the situation ended.
Commodities Consolidation

This is a repeating situation for empires with the  Obsessional Directive civic. The situation starts at 119 progress and has −1 monthly progress; thus the situation repeats every 10 years, representing a regular quota of  consumer goods production.
There are two approaches for this situation which can be changed at any time:
Fulfill –  Artisan drones +10% output and +10% upkeep, and  +5% unity.
Overdrive –  Artisan drones +25% output and +25% upkeep,  +10% unity, and  −1 influence monthly.
When the situation ends, it compares the current stockpile amount of consumer goods against the current quota. The initial quota is set based on the difficulty setting. Each time the current quota is met, it is multiplied by 1.2; conversely, if the quota is failed, it is divided by 1.2.
If the quota is failed, the empire gains Production Target Failure: −50%  unity and  influence. This modifier is removed the next time the situation ends, unless it is reapplied then. Additionally, failing the quota reduces the stockpile of consumer goods to a maximum of 1000. Finally, it also unlocks the Maximize purge type, if it was not already unlocked.
If the quota is met, the empire can choose to store the produced  consumer goods and gain  unity, or trade the consumer goods for  energy,  influence, or a single random  research type; whichever choice is made uses all stored consumer goods, resetting the amount for the next quota. Storing the consumer goods adds a  Spire of Commodities deposit on a random uncolonizable celestial body. Each Spire of Commodities adds +2 consumer goods for orbital mining; however, note that this can conflict with existing research deposits on a celestial body.
Planetary Revolt
Planetary Revolt is a situation that takes place on a colony that has at least  10 pops and less than  25 stability for one year unless:
The colony changed owners within the last three years; if the colony has the  Stellar Culture Shock modifier, it must have less than  25 stability for five years after the initial three
The colony participated in a planetary revolt within the last 15 years
The situation also cannot start on a colony which is occupied or being invaded or bombarded. The situation's potential monthly progress must also be greater than 0.
If at least  5 pops on the planet are slaves with less than  40% happiness, the revolt is termed a slave revolt, which affects which events can be triggered and certain other effects. In addition to the usual methods, a slave revolt can be ended by discontinuing slavery.  Gestalt Consciousness empires cannot have slave revolts.
The situation has the following approaches, which can be changed at any time:
Maintain Current Measures – No effects
Distribute Amenities – Adds  +20 Amenities; costs  −20 consumer goods monthly, or  −30 unity monthly instead if  Gestalt Consciousness
Institute a Crackdown – Adds +50% Army and Stronghold build speed,  +3 stability and  +1 energy upkeep from  Soldier jobs; costs  −30 unity monthly
This situation's monthly progress is dependent on a number of factors, outlined below. In addition, manually resettling pops away from the colony instantly adds +5 progress for each pop resettled.

Planetary Revolt situations progress through four stages, each lasting 25 progress and adding an additional  −10 stability. The effects of each stage happen only the first time that stage is entered.
At stage II, the colony gains +100% attraction towards a weighted random ethic; a slave revolt adds  30 devastation instead.
At stage III, a weighted random species on the revolting colony is chosen as the "revolting species", and all colonies within 6 hyperlanes of the one starting the situation which have at least 20% of the pops belonging to the revolting species and less than  35 stability gain the  Spreading Turbulence modifier for 10 years, adding  −10 stability.
At stage IV, the closest eligible empire is asked to support the revolt. Accepting costs  100 influence and adds a decaying  −200 opinion with the colony's owner. If the empire refuses, the next closest eligible empire is asked and so on, until an empire accepts or all eligible empires refuse.
In order to be eligible, the empire must match the revolting species type:  Hive Mind for  Hive-Minded,  Machine Intelligence for  Machine, or primary species for  non-Gestalt empires;  Fanatic Egalitarians are also eligible with a slave revolt; additionally, the empire must be independent and not have a  defensive pact,  non-aggression pact, or be in a  federation with the colony's owner.
If the situation completes, the revolting colony that started the situation forms a new empire and takes control of the system as well as every system that has a colony with the  Spreading Turbulence modifier and less than  35 stability. Next, all neighboring systems owned by the original empire without a colony or Bastion starbase are transferred; finally, any system owned by the original empire which borders two or more of the revolting empire's systems is transferred, unless it has a colony or a Bastion starbase. The original empire gains claims on all lost systems and any fleets it has in those systems go MIA.
If no empire supported the revolt, the revolting empire gains a large amount of resources and a fleet equal to 80% of its  naval capacity. The original empire can decide to start a war as the defender or set a truce with the revolting empire.
If an empire supported the revolt, it annexes the revolting empire. If the original empire isn't already at war with the supporting empire, it can decide to start a war as the defender or set a truce with the supporting empire.
While the situation is active, the colony that started it has a ~2.5% chance each month to gain one of the following modifiers; only one of these modifiers can be gained per situation.
Slave revolts have two different modifiers, with the same monthly ~2.5% chance. Both modifiers can be gained during the same situation, but not within the same year, and not during the first stage of the revolt.
AI-Related Incidents


The Machine Uprising with the option to switch empires in red
AI-Related Incidents is a mid-game situation that can happen to empires enslaving artificial intelligence. It has a 30% chance to occur for  individualist, biological empires once per decade year (e.g. 2300, 2310, etc.) as long as the following requirements are met:
It is 10 years or less before the .
The empire has researched either the  Sapient Combat Simulations or  Artificial Administration technology
The empire's primary species is not  Mechanical or  Machine
At least 25% or 75 of the empire's pops have the  Mechanical trait, whichever is less
The  Artificial Intelligence policy is not set to Citizen Rights
The  Robotic workers policy is not set to Outlawed
The AI-Related Incidents situation hasn't already happened to this empire
The first time it triggers, there is a 33% chance of starting the situation immediately and a 67% chance to get the Computational Overclocking event chain instead. The first event in the chain has two options: a 67% chance to start the situation in 6 to 12 months, or to spend  500 energy and gain the Computational Overclocking empire modifier, which gives  +5% research speed. Choosing the second option triggers a follow-up event 1.5 to 3 months later which again has two options: a 67% chance to start the situation in 4.5 to 9 months, or to receive a third event in 1.5 to 3 months, which sets the Computational Overclocking empire modifier to expire in 7 years and has a final 67% chance of starting the situation in 3 to 6 months. If the situation does not begin after the event chain, the next time it triggers, it begins immediately.
When the situation starts, if the player received the Computational Overclocking event and chose to gain the Computational Overclocking empire modifier, the situation starts with 2 progress; if the player received the third Computational Overclocking event, the situation starts with 5 progress instead; otherwise, the situation starts at 0 progress. The situation has a base monthly progress of −2. Positive monthly progress primarily comes from the number and percentage of  Mechanical pops in the empire, scaling per robot pop. If the Artificial Intelligence policy is Outlawed, robots in  specialist jobs count the same as in  worker jobs. In addition, progress is added for each Mechanical pop disassembled (+2) or displaced (+1). Changing either the Artificial Intelligence or Robotic Workers policy to Outlawed while the situation is active adds +25 progress. If the empire has fewer than 3 colonies or the robot pop progress factor is too low (less than +0.5 or less than +7.2 if robots have Citizen Rights), the situation gains −20 monthly progress.
Approaches and stages
The situation initially uses the approach Maintain Current Measures, which has no effects. It offers two alternative approaches, and choosing either of them prevents changing approaches later.
Outlaw Robots: Changes the  Robotic Workers policy to Outlawed, which instantly adds +25 progress. This approach is not available for  Materialist empires.
Grant Robots Citizenship: Changes the  Artificial Intelligence policy to Citizen Rights, which adds −5 monthly progress. This approach is not available for  Spiritualist empires.
The situation has three stages; the first stage has no effect and lasts until 33 progress; the second stage gives  −20% robot resource output and lasts until 67 progress; the third and final stage gives  −50% robot resource output
While the situation is active, two special projects are available. Completing either special project ends the situation at the cost of  500 energy and  1000 unity.
Neutralize Rampant AI: Costs  30,000 physics research. Completing it gives  −10% research speed for 20 years.
Panicked Measures: Costs  10,000 physics research. Completing it gives  −25% research speed for 20 years.
Random events
The situation keeps track of "cruelty" points, which increase each time a  Mechanical pop is purged and also increases or decreases with various events. If the cruelty points go above 20, the situation gains +5 monthly progress. If the situation progresses completely, there is a chance for the machine empire to start with the  Determined Exterminator or  Driven Assimilator civic that scales with these points. When the situation first starts, the robots ask if they possess souls; answering "no" adds +1 points, while answering "yes" adds −2 points. Empires that are  Materialist have a third answer, which does not add or subtract any points. In addition, while the situation is active, there is a 45% chance each month that an event occurs, potentially further adding or subtracting points. Each of the following events can only happen once; some effects happen in follow-up events.
Completion outcome
If the situation progresses completely, a Machine Uprising takes place. When that happens, a  Machine empire is created, which takes control of 25% to 75% of the creator empire's systems to a maximum of 101 systems, scaled by the percentage of  Mechanical pops in the empire. All  Mechanical pops become  Machine pops, and each planet in the uprising replaces up to 5 pops with Machine pops. The machine empire has a 21% base chance to have the  Driven Assimilator civic, increased by the cruelty score. It also has a ~1% base chance to have the  Determined Exterminator civic instead, increasing with the cruelty score. Purging or outlawing robots during the situation or having robots with the  Domestic Protocols trait significantly increases the chance by ~10% each. The  Machine empire starts a war with the Machine Uprising wargoal against the creator empire. A human player has the option to switch to the machine empire. The machine empire also gains:
All of creator's technologies, except those blocked for  Machine Intelligences
 +1000% Naval capacity for 5 years
 20,000 Energy
 20,000 Minerals
 10,000 Alloys
 10,000 Food
 5,000 Consumer goods
 1,000 Exotic gases
 1,000 Rare crystals
 1,000 Volatile motes
 800 Influence
 500 Unity per year since game start
 100 Dark matter
3  Hunter-Killer armies per planet (6 if  Determined Exterminator)
3 fleets that together use 80% of its  naval capacity (4 using 150% if  Determined Exterminator)
There is a ~7% chance for the machine empire to be  Dictatorial instead of  Machine Intelligence. The chance is increased by cruelty score.
Pre-FTL situations
These situations are related to .
Observation Insights
Observation insights is a repeating situation that triggers as long as an empire has any  and at least one pre-FTL empire that is not fully aware. Each time the situation reaches 100 progress, the next received observation event grants one of 13 unique insight technologies as a research option.
Base progress depends on the number of observation posts active each time the situation starts: each observation post with Passive Observation adds +0.5 monthly progress and each other observation post adds +1 monthly progress; observation posts over fully aware pre-FTL empires add no monthly progress. This base progress does not change if observation posts change their mission or are gained or lost, at least until the situation starts over. Additional factors modify this base amount as in the table on the right. There are three approaches, which can be switched at any time:
Favor Insights – Reduces observation post output by −50% and increases progress by +25%
Collect Insights – No effect
Favor Mission – Increases observation post output by +50% and reduces progress by −25%
Observation events can also add a boost to progress when no insight is available. When the situation completes, it cannot restart until an observation event grants an insight technology. If all insight technologies have been unlocked, gaining a new insight adds a resource modifier to the observation post instead. The situation aborts if the empire has no pre-FTL empires without full awareness in its borders.
All insight technologies cost base 6000 research points.
New World Order
This situation can trigger on a non-gestalt, non-Stone age pre-FTL empire. The situation progresses by +2 each month. There are three approaches, which can be changed at any time.
Watch and Learn
Aid Leader – Costs  25 unity,  50 energy,  50 minerals, and  25 alloys monthly
Aid Rebels – Costs  25 unity,  100 energy,  100 minerals, and  50 alloys monthly
If the empire's  Pre-FTL Interference policy is Non-Interference, choosing to aid either side sets the policy to Active Interference.
There are four stages, each taking 25 progress. When each stage is first entered, it triggers one of two events, each event has the same effects and options, just with different flavoring. One option requires the current approach to be aiding either side, with the same effect regardless of side, the other option is always available.
When the situation completes, one of two outcome events is triggered. The likelihood is increased by selecting to aid either side and increased more by aiding that side in the Stage IV event. Both events have the same basic effect for the observing empire, gain society insight if the target pre-FTL is not fully aware and  24x society output (500~1 000 000), and a specific effect:
Grip of the Autarch – The target pre-FTL shifts towards  Fanatic Authoritarian, and if the approach is Aid Leader, gain Autarch Triumphant for 10 years:  +10% happiness,  +10% unity,  +50% Authoritarian attraction.
Year Zero – The target pre-FTL shifts towards  Fanatic Egalitarian, and if the approach is Aid Rebels, gain Unfettered Flags for 10 years:  +15% happiness,  +10% unity,  +50% Egalitarian attraction.
Organic Singularity
This situation can trigger on a non-gestalt, not fully aware pre-FTL empire. The situation progresses by a base of +2 each month. There are three approaches, which cannot be changed once selected.
Watch and Learn
Prevent Singularity – Costs  25 unity and  25 physics monthly, −1 monthly progress
Promote Singularity – Costs  50 unity and  50 physics monthly, +1 monthly progress
If the empire's  Pre-FTL Interference policy is Non-Interference, choosing to prevent or promote the singularity sets the policy to Active Interference.
Each month, an event can trigger depending on how much progress has been made and which approach is active. These events can only trigger once
Zoonotic Plague
This situation can trigger on a non-gestalt, not fully aware pre-FTL empire. The situation progresses by a base of +2 each month. Each month there is chance for one of the pre-FTL empire's pops to die. The first time this happens, an event notifies the player. If this happens when there are 3 or fewer pops left, they all die, the pre-FTL empire is destroyed and the situation ends. There are three approaches, which cannot be changed once selected.
Watch and Learn
Provide Aid – Costs  25 unity,  25 society, and  25 food monthly, −1 monthly progress, reduces chance of pops dying each month
Promote the Disease – Costs  50 unity and  50 society monthly, +1 monthly progress, increases chance of pops dying each month
If the empire's  Pre-FTL Interference policy is Non-Interference, choosing to prevent or promote the singularity sets the policy to Active Interference.
There are three stages, 0 to 35, 36 to 70, and 71 to 100. When first entering the second stage one of two events is randomly triggered based on the current approach, and when entering the third stage and on completion, an event is triggered based on that random event or its follow-up.


Paragon situations
Main article: 
There are a number of situations related to , a legendary paragon. These situations generally have approximately a 10% chance of starting while a country has hired Skrand Sharpbeak each 10 to 25 years since recruiting him. Most multistage situations trigger an event on entering each stage after the first; most of these events are narrative only. These situations end if Skrand is no longer hired by the country with them.
Ascension situations
Main article: 
These situations are triggered as part of an  upon adopting the  Cybernetics,  Synthetics, or  Psionics tradition tree, or the  Synthetic Age or  Biomorphosis ascension perks. The related ascension traditions require these situations to be completed before their potential is unlocked.
Crisis situations
Voidworm Plague
This situation is gained by all empires during the . It has three stages of 200 progress, for a total of 600 progress. The situation starts at 0 and has a default monthly progress of +0.5. There are four approaches which, once taken, cannot be changed for three years. Additionally, killing a Voidworm gives 2 progress, multiplied by the Voidworm's ship size. This means that killing a Voidworm Troika gives 32 progress.
Do Nothing
Support Our Fleets - +0.5 progress,  +15% Alloys from jobs,  +15% Damage to Voidworms,  −10% Monthly Consumer Goods,  −5% Happiness
Purge Infected - +0.7 progress,  −30% Orbital bombardment damage from Voidworms,  −10% Happiness
Search for a Cure - +1 progress,  +25% Monthly unity,  −50% Monthly society research
If an approach other than Do Nothing is chosen, a random event will fire at the start of each stage. There are three possible events for every approach, and each event can only fire once.
Support Our Fleets events:
Excess Components: Option between:
 +25% Ship build speed for 10 years. Costs  1000 energy.
Gain  48x alloys output (700~30 000), or  18x food output (250~5000) and  18x minerals output (250~5000) for empires with a biological shipset or a 
 Beastmasters
 civic.
Call to Arms: Refreshes the leader pool and adds three commanders with an additional starting level to it.
Front Line Development: Grants 50% progress towards a defense-related ship component (armor, shield, crystal plating, or auxiliary component). If all of them are already researched, grants progress towards a random  Materials technology instead. If that is not possible either, grants  18x physics output (350~100 000).
Purge Infected events:
[Scientist] Infected: This event can only fire if there is an organic scientist who is neither the empire ruler nor the heir. Option between:
Killing the scientist to gain 100 progress.
Attempting to save the scientist. This has 50% chance of failure (killing the scientist with no reward) and 50% chance of success (giving the scientist the  Maimed trait and the empire gains  18x unity output (250~1 000 000).
Quarantine Breach: This event can only fire if any owned planet is infected by Voidworms. Option between:
Killing up to 100 organic pops on each owned colony to gain  18x unity output (250~1 000 000). If the empire is a machine without the Rogue Servitors civic, costs a quarter of the empire's Food stockpile and adds devastation to each planet instead of killing pops.
Allowing a fleet of 3 Voidworm Nymphs to spawn over each colony.
Dereliction of Duty: This event cannot fire for  Gestalt Consciousness,  Machine or  genocidal empires. Option between:
Gain  12x unity output (150~100 000). Costs  500 energy and  1000 minerals.
 −10% Happiness until the situation ends, unless the empire has the  Media Conglomerate civic.
Search for a Cure events:
Tangential Breakthrough: Grants progress in a random  Biology technology. If none are available, grants  12x society output (250~100 000) instead.
Early-Stage Testing: This event cannot fire for  Machine Intelligence empires. The individualist version has the following options:
100 progress and  24x society output (500~1 000 000), but also  −10% happiness and  −10% pop growth speed until the situation ends.
50 progress, but also  −5% pop growth speed until the situation ends.
Gain  12x unity output (150~100 000).
 Hive Minds are given the following options instead:
100 progress, but also  −5% resources from jobs and  −10% pop growth speed until the situation ends.
Gain  6x unity output (100~100 000).
Voidworm Glands: Option to gain the Voidworm Glands special project, which requires researching the debris of a bombarding Voidworm Troika within 5 years. The special project grants 100 progress and  18x unity output (250~1 000 000).
Growing Pains
This situation is gained by an empire reaching Tier V of the  Player Crisis. It has eight stages, with the first one requiring 80 progress and each subsequent stage requiring 20 more progress than the last. The total required progress is 1200, starting at 0. The default monthly progress is +1 and it cannot become negative, though it is severely reduced by empire size. Progress can be increased by transferring pops or by feeding the Behemoth, granting up to +555% progress.
The situation has three approaches which can be changed at any time, but at a cost of  2500 food:
Fight - −0.75 progress monthly,  +15% Ship fire rate,  +50% Armor hardening
Digestion - +2 progress monthly,  30% Sublight speed reduction,  −25% Ship fire rate,  +25% Daily hull regen
Flight -  +25% Sublight speed,  +5 Evasion chance
Reaching a new stage results in an event with options to enhance the Class IV Behemoth. Many of them add special actions to it that can be activated in or outside combat.
