Archaeological site

Version

Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article. At least some were last verified for  4.1.

This article is for the PC version of Stellaris only.
List of discoveries



Archaeological sites
 

Archaeological Site
Archaeological sites are  across the galaxy, usually taking the form of ancient ruins, which can be excavated by  for a variety of rewards.
With the  Ancient Relics DLC, archaeological sites serve as the primary source of  minor artifacts, and many chapters reward a number of them when completed. When that DLC is not enabled, sites which are still available may have an alternate reward or no reward for such chapters.
Contents




























Excavation mechanics
Excavating an archaeological site requires the site to be within the empire's borders and requires assigning a   and science ship to it. The scientist remains at the site and uncovers its secrets over the course of multiple chapters, with each chapter providing a part of the site's story. Certain archaeological sites are only revealed to the empire that discovered them and cannot be excavated by another empire.
Excavation proceeds in phases of 90 days; this time can be modified by leader traits, and AI empires always take twice as long. At the end of each phase, a die is rolled, with a random result from 1 to 10; adding the current number of clues and the scientist's Archaeology Skill and subtracting the chapter's difficulty gives the total result, as in the following formula:
Result=Die Roll+Scientist Skill + Bonus+Clues−Difficulty.
The scientist's skill is equal to the scientist's level, plus any modifiers from leader traits, including councilors and the  Curator Archaeology Lab technology.
A result of 14 or greater completes the current chapter; a result of 11-13 adds two clues for the next phase, a result of 6-10 adds one clue, a result of 5 or less adds no clues. A result of 5 or less can also trigger various events – depending on the archaeological site and chapter. These events can be helpful: add clues, give loot, even remove the  Substance Abuser leader trait (5% chance); or harmful: remove clues or even kill the scientist (~2.9% chance).
Completing the chapter gives the scientist 75 experience; finding two clues gives them 40 experience, one clue 25 experience. Even when finding no clues still gives the scientist 10 experience. Clues gained from events, however, do not automatically give experience.
Excavation of archaeological sites can be paused and resumed at any time with no penalty. If the system with the archaeological site is gained by another empire, that empire can continue the excavation from the current chapter, but cannot gain any rewards from already completed chapters, thus fully excavated archaeological sites cannot be re-excavated by another empire
Most sites have a 67% chance to leave a  minor artifacts deposit when the excavation process is complete. If a deposit is created, its value has an 80% chance of being 1, a 16% chance of of being 2, and a 4% chance of being 3. The scientist trait  Antiquarian increases the chance of gaining any deposit by 5% per level, and slightly increases the chance of a higher level deposit as well.
Excavation events
At the end of each phase, if the result is 5 or less, then one of the following events may happen:
Excavating Scientist dies, lose −2 clues
Archaeology team members die, lose −1 clues
A dangerous situation is avoided, gain +3 clues
Choice to pay  100 Energy to gain +3 clues or do nothing and lose −2 clues
Excavating Scientist gains the  Maimed trait
The events are flavored according to the type of archaeological site, but the effects generally remain constant. Some archaeological sites have additional special events or no random events.
Base game sites
The following sites do not require any DLC to be enabled, but  Ancient Relics is required to gain  minor artifacts from them.
Unique systems sites
The following sites can only be found in certain .  Ancient Relics is required to gain  minor artifacts from sites even if the site is otherwise available.
Origin sites
The following archaeological sites are generated by Origins.  Ancient Relics is required to gain minor artifact rewards.
From Gateway Sent
The From Gateway Sent archaeological site is discovered by investigating the special project created by the  Galactic Doorstep origin.
Homeworld Excavation
The  Clone Army origin adds an archaeological site to the homeworld 3 to 5 years after game start
Hard Reset sites
The  Hard Reset origin has the following archaeological sites, which are only visible to empires with the origin.
On the Shoulders of Giants sites
The  On the Shoulders of Giants origin adds a lengthy archaeological site chain in the empire home system. The narration of the last two chapters of the final site is random, but the rewards are always the same.
First Contact origin sites
The origins  Payback and  Broken Shackles each have a special archaeological site on their homeworld.
Quantum Catapult
The  Slingshot to the Stars origin adds an archaeological site in the pulsar system where the ruined Quantum Catapult is located.
Ancient Crater
The  Riftworld origin adds an archaeological site to the empire's homeworld.
Derelict Safehouse
The  Treasure Hunters origin adds an archaeological site to the system revealed by the Ancient Capsule after talking to Smeegibb. It is not visible to other empires
The Shrouded World
Empires with the  Endbringers origin start with a  Shrouded World in their home system, which gains the The Shrouded World archaeological site one month after starting the game.
Precursor sites
 archaeological sites explore the history of a certain precursor civilization. Currently, four precursor civilizations use archaeological sites.
Baol and Zroni
These sites are visible only to the empire that starts the event chain and are used to advance the Baol and Zroni event chains. When a Zroni archaeological site is discovered, the planet also gains a deposit of  2-4 Zro.
adAkkaria Convention and Inetian Traders
These sites are used to advance the adAkkaria and Inetian event chains. These sites typically have an alternate reward if  Ancient Relics is not enabled. Each chain is started via a , Ancient Signals and Ancient Shelter respectively.
Ancient Relics sites
The Ancient Relics DLC adds a large number of archaeological sites to the game.
Whispers in the Stone
Whispers in the Stone is an archaeological site that will inevitably spawn for one empire. After an empire researched the  Mineral Isolation technology, each time it researches a technology and has at least one  Mining District on a planet without an archaeological site there is a 5% chance to trigger the Whispers in the Stone event on a planet. The event gives the option to add the Whispers in the Stone archaeological site to the planet or an  Ore-Rich Caverns planetary feature. While the archaeological site is present the planet gains −50%  Minerals from Jobs.
The Sentinels
The Sentinels is an archaeological site with slightly different mechanics. It can be discovered on a colonized planet with more than 5 pops and adds an archaeological site blocker to the colony. It cannot be discovered by  Gestalt Consciousness empires.
If any of the outcomes comes to having the 9  attacking the colony totaling 2350 garrison/army power here are the outcomes of the battle:
The Sentinels win and seize control of the colony
The sentinels start purging owners pops
The planet can be retaken and liberated from the Sentinels (see Sentinels defeated)
If the pops get liberated before they get fully purged they revive a liberated  30% happiness boost for 10 years
If the pops are left to be fully purged, the colony gets destroyed and the last pop escapes to a randomly owned planet. Reveals and enables the "Into the Earth" special project above the Sentinel planet. Choice of:
Put their minds to work with some science: Receive the  Ever More Science planet modifier on the capital:  +10%
Modify the Evermore to entertain the masses: Receive the  Ever More Joy planet modifier on the capital:  −10%,  +5%
The Sentinels are defeated (liberation also applies this)
Gain the  Sentinels Metal feature on the colony
Defeating the Sentinels also reveals a tomb entrance and choice between:
Investigate the entrance Issues special project "Into the Earth". Once completed, choose between:
Purge and repurpose: gain
 300 Influence
 Cheap Thrills planet modifier:  −10%,  +5%
Virtual hunting ground: If  Militarist or  Xenophobe gain:
 300 Influence
 Cheap Thrills planet modifier:  +10%,  +10%,  −10%,  +5%
Replicate the technology: If  Militarist and  Xenophobe gain:
Issue the "Replicate the Evermore" special project. Gain the  Cheap Thrills empire modifier:  −10%,  +5%
Lab rats:
Gain the  The Evermore planet modifier:  +10%
Seal the entrance
Gain 150  Influence and conclude the event chain
Other expansion sites
Certain archaeological sites require other DLC to be enabled.  Ancient Relics is required to gain minor artifact rewards.
The Broken Gates
The Broken Gates archaeological site can be discovered on any planet that is not a gas giant, asteroid or located in a black hole system. It is not available for  Gestalt Consciousness empires.
Chthonic Siren
If an empire is part of a  Research Cooperative, then fully excavating any archaeological site has a 10% chance to start the event chain which reveals this site. Each member of the federation receives the site if a suitable system and planet exists within their borders, otherwise the member is given two special projects to support their federation allies with sites. Federation members can also opt not to participate.
If all members who opted to participate complete their site or projects, the federation gains  +40 cohesion and each member gains  60 minor artifacts and the Genius Caeli: A Time of Knowing empire modifier for 20 years. Otherwise, five years after any member fully excavates their site, if at least one other site is partially excavated or one special project set completed or similar total progress is made, the federation gains  +25 cohesion and each member gains  30 minor artifacts and the Genius Caeli: Balanced Prosperity empire modifier for 20 years. If no other site is excavated or special project set completed, the federation gains  −20 cohesion and each member gains  10 minor artifact.
Cosmic Storms sites
Green Skies is discovered in the usual way; the other sites may be revealed after a storm passes.
Synthetic Queen
There are two archeological sites obtained by completing the special projects obtained after the  constructs her outposts. Cetana: Unlikely Survivor is not guaranteed to spawn but the chance is very high (50% per special project). Cetana: The Queen's Servants is guaranteed to spawn after an empire completes all special projects. Each site can appear once per empire.
The Last Thought
This archaeological site is unique to the Last Thought system, which always spawns near the  Fallen Empire.
Shadows of the Shroud sites

