Celestial object
(Redirected from )

Version

This article has been verified for the current PC  (4.2) of the game.
Celestial object

Classification



Celestial objects are large bodies within systems, including stars, planets, moons, and asteroids. Celestial objects may have  which can be harvested by . Each start system can have between 2 and 15 celestial objects.
When any owned ship enters a system or passes within its sensor range, any habitable planets in the system will be revealed along with their world type. To see further details about the celestial objects in a system, it is necessary to survey them with a science ship. This will reveal all of the orbital resources associated with each planet or asteroid. For habitable worlds, this will also reveal more detailed world information including: size, available districts,  and  (if any), and the habitability for each species in the player's empire. Additionally, surveying worlds has a chance to reveal .
Contents










Planet size
The  planet size determines the visual size of a planet and the maximum number of  the planet can support if it's habitable. Planets can have various sizes, but habitable ones will always be within the following margins:
Planets have a size between 12 and 25.
Moons have a size between 10 and 15.
Homeworlds have a size between 18 and 21, unless otherwise determined by the empire's .
Habitable planets
Habitable planets are the only natural celestial objects that can be  and , without the  Terraforming Candidate planet modifier.
There are nine types of regular habitable planets, divided equally into three climate categories:  Wet,  Dry, and  Cold. Each type's  base habitability for a given species depends on how closely it matches a species' homeworld: in general, a species will have 100% habitability for its homeworld, 80% habitability for planets of the same type, 60% habitability for planets of the same climate category, and 20% habitability for every other climate category and type. Finally, these habitability values can be both increased and decreased species-wide by certain  and for a given planet by certain planetary features and planetary modifiers.
A planet's type also affects the set of possible  and blockers it may have. Each of the three climate categories has a slight bias towards different resources from their planetary features.
Volcanic Worlds can only appear if the  Infernals DLC is installed. Their  Alloys from jobs output is increased by +5% and they use a different set of districts.
Special habitable planets
Special habitable planets are only spawned in certain systems, but any empire that meets the requirements can terraform a regular habitable world into a special one. Certain  use one of these as the empire's homeworld. All of them have either very high or zero habitability, and several of them feature "ideal" habitability, meaning that they have 100% base habitability for all species.
Habitable megastructures
Habitable megastructures are artificial celestial objects and can be constructed using resources after researching the required technology. They feature the same  Habitability for every species and have different districts and . They do not normally have any planetary features on them but may contain blockers. Their appearance depends on the ship appearance of the empire that constructed them.
Uninhabitable planets
All non-star celestial objects that cannot harbor life are classified as uninhabitable. These planets cannot be colonized or terraformed unless they have the  Terraforming Candidate modifier, but they can have various resource deposits.
Special uninhabitable planets
Special uninhabitable planets can only be created in unique systems or as a result of events.
Asteroid belts
Asteroid belts can only appear in systems with a single star or special systems. Each single star system has a 30% chance to have an asteroid belt, a 10% chance to have two asteroid belts and a 2% chance to have four asteroid belts. Each asteroid belt will have 1-6 asteroid celestial objects, partially depending on distance from the star. Asteroid belts and the asteroids in them come in 3 types.
Each asteroid can have deposits of  Trade Value.
Rocky asteroids can have deposits of  Minerals,  Alloys or  Volatile Motes.
Ice asteroids can have deposits of  Energy or  Exotic Gases.
Crystalline asteroids can only appear in special systems and have deposits of 1 or 3  Rare Crystals. They can also be found in the home system of empires with the  Cosmic Dawn origin but these can only have deposits of  Minerals.
Asteroids are surveyed twice as fast as other celestial objects (15 days instead of 30).
Stars
A star is a celestial object that composes the center of a star system and influences the generation of the solar system. They are classified based on their . Less common stars also have a negative effect on all ships in the system, making certain tactics less effective in battle. Different stars have different likelihoods for habitable planets to appear in the system.
Most solar systems are unary systems with only one star, but they can also exist as binary systems with two stars or trinary systems with three stars, either orbiting each other in the center with all planets around them or spread out further apart from each with a few planets orbiting each star. Star effects stack in binary and trinary systems. All binary and trinary systems except for F/M, B/M, B/neutron and A/neutron (which cannot spawn habitable planets) have 100% habitable planet chance. All natural systems have 4-10 (inclusive) orbiting objects, except single neutron stars, black holes and pulsars (which have 1-4).
Astral scars

An astral scar
Astral scars are celestial objects that appear at the edge of systems. At the beginning of the game 10% of the systems will contain an astral scar and each one will have a deposit of 2  Astral Threads. After the mid-game year is reached, each year there is a small chance for new astral scars to appear and for existing ones to become an . If the system is owned by an empire, it will be notified. New astral scars will have a deposit of 1  Astral Threads. Astral scars are twice more likely to appear in systems with multiple stars and thrice more likely to appear in nebulae. They cannot appear if an adjacent system has an astral scar or astral rift.
