Colonization

Version

This article has been verified for the current PC  (4.2) of the game.
Celestial object


Colonization


Colonization is the process of establishing control over an uninhabited, habitable planet with a Colony Ship. Planets with an  or a pre-FTL civilization cannot be colonized.

Humanoid empire colonizing a new world
Contents












Habitability
 Habitability is the measure of how comfortably a species can live on a planet. Most species have a  for one of the primary  types, although more exotic preferences are possible. A planet's habitability for a given species is determined by how closely its climate matches that species' preference. The 9 regular habitable world types are divided into 3 climate categories: dry, frozen, and wet.  Mechanical and  Machine species have habitability traits for climate groups rather than individual planet types.  Ring Worlds,  Gaia Worlds, and  Ecumenopolises have maximum habitability for all species, while  Tomb Worlds,  Machine Worlds, and  Hive Worlds normally have  0% habitability and require certain traits for pops to comfortably live there.
Every 1% reduction of habitability below 100% increases pops'  upkeep and  amenities usage by +1% and reduces their  job efficiency and  species growth by −0.5%. It floors at 0% Habitability, giving +100% pop upkeep and amenities usage, and −50% job output and pop growth.
Homeworlds have +30% habitability for the species originating from them.
Low habitability can trigger various events.
A confirmation message pops up if you attempt to settle a planet with less than 70% habitability.
In some cases, there may be a raised habitability floor or a lowered habitability ceiling:
Robotic pops or species with  Cave Dweller or  Molebots traits have a habitability floor of 50%. This can stack, giving Molebots effectively 100% habitability everywhere.
The habitability ceiling can be reduced to below 100%, such as pops with  Noxious traits or from certain rare .
The habitability floor overrides the habitability ceiling if it is higher.
There are four ways to improve habitability:
Terraforming the planet. This needs a certain technology and may have additional requirements depending on the original planet. Some terraforming methods also require an .
 the climate preference of the pops, which requires the  Glandular Acclimation technology for biological pops (robots/machines do not require technology to change habitability), or adding traits that increase habitability. A template with the appropriate traits can be applied to pops on relevant planets, or used by colony ships.
Obtaining alien species with a different climate preference. This can be done by conquest, migration treaty, infiltrating a pre-FTL civilization, uplifting a pre-sapient species, certain events and offers, or purchasing from the  Slave Market. Empires can colonize with any species that has migration access to the empire, even if no pops of that species currently live on the empire's worlds, provided they have the  species right.
Researching technologies, acquiring traditions, or constructing buildings that increase base habitability.
Habitability indicators
Systems containing habitable worlds have one or more planet icons that are either green, yellow, orange, red, or blue – depending on the habitability percentage and/or status of the planet(s) in question.
Improving habitability
Aside from changing climate preference, there are also various other sources for affecting habitability:



Terraforming
Terraforming is the process of changing the planet classification of a planet in order to make it more habitable for a species. A planet must be surveyed and within the empire's borders to be terraformed. It is possible to terraform inhabited planets if the empire has the  Ecological Adaptation technology. Doing so inflicts a  −20% happiness penalty on the planet for the duration of the process.
The first time a planet is terraformed, there's a chance of triggering a . Terraformed planets cannot receive .
Some  will be removed when terraforming a planet:

Terraforming cost and speed are affected by the following:

Some planets are unable to be terraformed by standard methods:
 Ecumenopoli and  habitable megastructures cannot be terraformed
 Relic Worlds cannot be terraformed except by restoring it into an  Ecumenopolis
Planets with pre-sapients cannot be terraformed if their policy is set to Protected
Several of the  cannot be terraformed
  cannot be terraformed
Special planet types
If the planet is terraformed into a  Machine World and there are any pops on the planet without the  Cybernetic,  Mechanical, or  Machine traits, they are all killed, and the  Organic Slurry feature is added.
Terraforming candidates
Planets that have a  Terraforming Candidate modifier can be terraformed after researching the  Climate Restoration technology.
If the terraformed planet was a  Toxic World, the following  are created:
 Poisonous Algae
 Rotten Soil
 Tainted Snowcaps
 Unpleasant Atmosphere
 Venomous Insects
Alternative terraforming methods
Worlds can also be terraformed via , which will terraform the world either instantly or when a situation started by the decision is completed.
In addition to the regular terraforming mechanics above, certain buildings, events, special projects, or other actions can terraform a planet.
The following can turn a planet into a  Gaia World:
 Idyllic Bloom
 empires can build  Gaia Seeders buildings and  Gaia Seeder Outpost holdings, which turn planets into Gaia Worlds.
The science ship used by Astrocreator Azaryn has the ability to terraform 3 planets into Gaia Worlds with the  Overgrowth modifier at the cost of  10000 Energy and 10 years.  Barren Worlds, even without the Terraforming Candidate modifier, can be terraformed this way as well but the time is increased to 25 years. The science ship merely starts the process and does not have to stay there.
The following can turn a planet into a  Tomb World:
 Armageddon bombardment turns the planet into a Tomb World if the last pop is killed.
 Javorian Pox bombardment turns the planet into a Tomb World if the last pop is killed. If there are  Mechanical or  Machine pops on the planet, they will not be killed, preventing the terraforming.
 can terraform all planets and moons in the empire's capital system, habitable and uninhabitable alike, into Tomb Worlds; only  Gas Giants,  Relic Worlds, and  Ecumenopoli are spared. Moreover, the climate preference of every pop living on those planets is changed to  Tomb World Preference.
 Relentless Industrialists
 can build  Coordinated Fulfillment Center and  Universal Productivity Alignment Facility buildings, which turn planets into Tomb Worlds over time.
The first time triggers the  situation; if the situation reaches maximum, the planet turns into a Tomb World. After the situations ends,  Industrialism policy is unlocked.
If the  policy is set to Full Steam Ahead or For Science!, further planets with a  Coordinated Fulfillment Center are turned into Tomb Worlds in 30 years and planets with a  Universal Productivity Alignment Facility turn into Tomb Worlds in 15 years, from now on without any warning. Only choosing the Cleanup policy stops this effect.
The following can turn a planet into a different planet type:
 World Cracker colossus turns the planet into a  Shattered World.
 Deluge Machine colossus turns the planet into an  Ocean World. It also kills all pops without an 
 Aquatic
 trait. Owned planets can be targeted. If any pops remain, the colossus owner gains ownership of the planet if not already owned.
 Toxic God colossus turns the planet into a  Toxic World with the  Toxic Terraforming Candidate modifier.
The  and  event chance may result in the planet being terraformed.
Colony ships
Colony ships allow an empire to settle  in owned systems. When ordering the construction of a colony ship, the player is given the option of choosing the species or sub-species of the  pop(s) that is sent to the new colony. Species require the  Colonization Allowed species rights to be selected for new colony ships. Pops are neither consumed nor transported in this process. Once constructed, the colony ship may be sent to any habitable world within an owned system to start a colony. Colony ships take one year to build and their upkeep cost is maintained throughout the whole colonization process. Colony ships can also be built through the  of the planet to be colonized, which automatically queues the colonization order as long as the path is not blocked.
The cost of a colony ship depends on the empire and its founder species class.

Meteorite Colony Ship
Empires with the  Corporate Dominion or  Private Prospectors civics can also construct Private Colony Ships, which cost  500 energy instead.
Empires with the  Calamitous Birth origin can also construct Lithoid Meteorites, which cost  500 minerals instead, have no upkeep cost, and take only 150 days to build. Lithoid Meteorites also have a much faster sublight speed than regular colony ships. A planet colonized by a lithoid meteorite gains two  Buried Lithoids blockers and the  Lithoid Crater modifier.
Councilors with the  Frontier Spirit trait reduce the cost of colony ships by  −10%.
Colony development
When a Colony Ship lands on a planet, a period of initial development occurs during which a colony is extremely vulnerable: just a few days of orbital bombardment wipes it out completely and the new colony does not produce any resources nor grows pops on the world. The initial development period lasts about 2 years and 10 months. Colony development speed can also be reduced by the following:
Once the colony has been successfully established, it starts with a tier 1  and 100  Pops of the species selected for the colony ship.
Open Seed Pods
Empires with the  Fruitful Partnership origin have an alternative method of colonizing worlds: seed pods distributed by  on uncolonized worlds can be activated by the "Open Seed Pods" special project. This enables a colony to be remotely established on a world with the seed pods for  3,000 energy without needing to build a colony ship. Once established, the new colony automatically creates an outpost if the system is unowned. This method cannot be used on uncolonized planets in systems owned by other empires.
First colony
The first time a colony is established the empire will receive the following rewards:
 Authoritarian empires can choose to gain 250-100000  Engineering Research and +100%  Authoritarian Ethics Attraction on the colony for 20 years
 Egalitarian empires can choose to gain 100-1000  Minerals and +100%  Egalitarian Ethics Attraction on the colony for 20 years
 Materialist empires can choose to gain 250-100000  Physics Research and +100%  Materialist Ethics Attraction on the colony for 20 years
 Spiritualist empires can choose to gain 100-100000  Unity and +100%  Spiritualist Ethics Attraction on the colony for 20 years
 Militarist empires can choose to gain 250-100000  Society Research and +100%  Militarist Ethics Attraction on the colony for 20 years
 Pacifist empires can choose to gain 100-1000  Consumer Goods and +100%  Pacifist Ethics Attraction on the colony for 20 years
 Xenophile empires can choose to gain 100-1000  Energy and +100%  Xenophile Ethics Attraction on the colony for 20 years
 Xenophobe empires can choose to gain 100-1000  Minerals and +100%  Xenophobe Ethics Attraction on the colony for 20 years
 Hive Mind empires with a biological founder species can choose to gain 100-1000  Food
 Hive Mind empires with a  Lithoid founder species can choose to gain 100-1000  Minerals
 Machine Intelligence empires can choose to gain 100-1000  Energy
 Thermophile empires can choose to gain 100-1000  Alloys
 Storm Chasers empires can choose to gain 250-100000  Engineering Research
 Evolutionary Predators empires can choose to gain 250-100000  Engineering Research
