Mutations

Version

Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article. At least some were last verified for  4.1.

This article is for the PC version of Stellaris only.
Ships






 Mutations
 
Mutations are components that can be added to space fauna. Each space fauna can have 3 mutations if the  Controlled Mutations technology has been researched and 6 mutations if the  Advanced Controlled Mutations technology has been researched. Mutations grow in strength with the growth stage of the space creature. Mutations also have a basic resources cost that depends on the cloned space fauna.
Contents










Defensive mutations
Defensive mutations increase the durability of a creature by providing extra hit points. These come in three forms: shields, armor, and hull.
Shields
Shields form the first layer of hit points of a creature. They are effective against energy weapons but vulnerable to kinetic weapons.
Carapace
Armor forms the second layer of hit points of a creature. They are effective against kinetic weapons but vulnerable to energy weapons.
Innards
Hull is the last layer of a creature's hit points; the creature is killed if the hull points reach 0. All creatures have some inherent hull points; this can be increased with these Innards components.
These can be acquired either by completing the  event chain, by reverse-engineering destroyed Crystalline Entities, or through searching an abandoned ship left by Caravaneers.
Special mutations
Unique mutations
Unique mutations are unlocked by the  Advanced Controlled Mutations technology and can only be applied once per creature.
Species mutations
Species mutations are obtained via a special project after cloning certain space fauna species and can only be added to that species.
Blessings
Blessings are mutations unlocked by gaining maximum favor with a . All of them cost 2  Zro.
Camouflages
Camouflages are mutations that allow space fauna to  Activate Cloaking but disables shields while the creature is cloaked.
