Ship designer

Version

Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article. At least some were last verified for  4.1.

This article is for the PC version of Stellaris only.
Ships


Ship designer



 
 

The ship designer
The Ship Designer (Hotkey F9) is where players may create, update and customize  templates and defense stations. If a ship of a design is under construction or being upgraded, the design cannot be edited. Many naval strategies advise that their empires deploy several types of warships to fill different tactical roles and face different opponents, and it is convenient for these to have different class names.
Clicking the Auto-Generate box on the lower left of the menu orders computer designers to continually update ship designs based on the latest technology research and the selected ship role. Note that they do not take account of the enemies that the fleet is facing or may face, so it might choose components that an opponent can counter instead of a less up-to-date component that has proven successful. For example, the computer might auto-generate a design with an advanced laser that is statistically superior although the current enemy has heavily invested in shield technology that will heavily impair laser weapons but is vulnerable to attacks with the existing missile weapons.
Direct involvement in ship design is optional. An alert icon will appear if a ship design is obsolete, and a toggle enables automatic upgrading of components for player convenience. Stellaris can be played without touching this menu very often, but it is always advisable to be aware of the strengths and weaknesses of current and potential enemies.
Contents
















Cost
Every ship design has an associated cost to build. This is the sum of the costs of its sections and components. The build time is determined by the ship type. The base monthly upkeep of a ship is determined as a percentage of its total build cost. Upkeep is split into 2 parts:
Hull Upkeep: determined by the ship type.
Component Upkeep: around 0.833% of its build cost in  Energy Credits and around 0.15% of its build cost in other resources.
Upgrading
If a ship design is edited, a fleet containing ships of that design can be ordered to return to a shipyard to upgrade. Upgrading will take all ships of a given name to the most recent design with the same name (e.g. a Victory-class will upgrade to the design for the Victory-class). Switching designs is done in the fleet manager via the Retrofit button - in this case, "upgrading" the fleet will switch all ships of the appropriate hull type to the newly selected ship design. This is useful for maintaining two designs of a type and switching between them.
If you delete a ship design that is currently in use, ships in a fleet will automatically be designated for a retrofit to the most recently changed ship design of that hull type. There must always be one design per hull type. The upgrade button will send the fleet back to a shipyard to change designs. (e.g. if you have a fleet of Victory-class corvettes and then make a Constellation-class of corvette and delete the design for the Victory-class, all Victory-class corvettes will be automatically marked for upgrading to the Constellation-class)
The upgrade cost is the difference in build cost between the new ship type and the old ship type. This will not refund resources if the new design is cheaper or uses different strategic resources in construction.
Power
Power is generated by the ship's reactor, as well as any Reactor Booster components the ship might have. Many components and subsystems require power to operate. A ship design cannot be approved if it has a negative power balance.
Excess power will give a small bonus to the ship's evasion, speed, and weapon damage using the following formula: excess power bonus =10%⋅(1−required powersupplied power)
Types
The type of the ship determines its base statistics.
Mechanical ships
Mechanical ships are available only to empire with a mechanical shipset.
Empires with the  Progenitor Hive origin can construct Offspring versions of Corvette, Destroyer, Cruiser and Battleship ships, which are visually larger, that have their hull, armor and shields increased by 50%, their weapon range increased by 25%, their cost and upkeep doubled, and an additional core component slot dedicated to  Offspring Oversight.
Empires that reach  Galactic Hyperthermia crisis level 3 can construct Ember Cruisers regardless of their shipset. Ember Cruisers are identical to cruisers but their cost and upkeep is not affected by installed components. They have have a fixed cost of 225  Crystallized Entropy that cannot be reduced and an upkeep of 1.2  Energy and 0.4  Crystallized Entropy which can be reduced.
Empires that reach  Galactic Hyperthermia crisis level 5 can construct Ember Battleships regardless of their shipset. Ember Battleships are identical to battleships but their cost and upkeep is not affected by installed components. They have have a fixed cost of 550  Crystallized Entropy that cannot be reduced and an upkeep of 2.4  Energy and 0.8  Crystallized Entropy which can be reduced. They can also equip the  Unlocks the Lensed Paralyzer weapon component.
Biological ships
Biological ships are only available to empires that use a biological shipset. Instead of sections biological ships have three growth stages, with the latter two having to be unlocked through research. Reactor output is increased by 25% for ships in the Mature growth stage and by 50% for ships in the Elder growth stage.
Empires with the  Progenitor Hive origin can construct Offspring versions of biological ships, which are visually larger, that have their hull, armor and shields increased by 50%, their weapon range increased by 25%, their cost and upkeep doubled, and an additional core component slot dedicated to  Offspring Oversight.
Hard Cap ships
Unlike most other ships, the following ships have a hard limit for how many a single empire can own. The mechanical and biological versions of these ships are statistically identical, and only the Titan ships vary in their base cost.
Defensive Structures
All defensive structures have no  Evasion or  Disengagement Chance. Deep Space Citadels' cost and upkeep are not impacted by installed components.
Mechanical fallen empire ships
Mechanical fallen empire ships are normally only available to fallen empires that use a mechanical shipset. However empires that take the  Cosmogenesis ascension perk, reach the required Crisis Level and use a mechanical shipset can research the technology to build these ships. They only have one section each.
Biological fallen empire ships
Biological fallen empire ships are normally only available to the Shattered Fragments fallen empires. However empires that take the  Cosmogenesis ascension perk, reach the required Crisis Level and use a biological shipset can research the technology to build these ships. They only have one section and growth stage each. For the purposes of the hard cap Cryptic Stinger is considered a titan, each taking half the regular titan limit.
Menacing ships
Menacing ships are only available to empires that took the  Galactic Nemesis ascension perk and reached the required Crisis Level. Their cost and upkeep are not impacted by installed components but can be reduced by percentage modifiers. They only have one section each.
Nanite ships
Nanite ships are available only to empires that have adopted the  Nanotech traditions. The  Flood of Supremacy tradition unlocks Nanite Swarmer ships and the  Nanite Augmentations tradition unlocks the Nanite Interdictor. Nanite ships have no upkeep, and their cost is not impacted by installed components, but they can be reduced by percentage modifiers. They only have one section each.
Components
Components are the individual systems and modules that define the capabilities of a ship, including weapons, defenses, hyperdrives, and utility systems. Most components have an individual cost that adds to build cost and to upkeep cost for ships with upkeep costs. The initial cost may be in  Alloys or any of several strategic resources, but upkeep costs are limited to  Energy and  Alloys. Downgrading components or leaving slots empty can lower the build and upkeep costs of ships of that design. When changing components in a design, ships can be upgraded at a shipyard for the change in costs (downgrading designs is also done with the "upgrade" button, but will return resources). Upgrading ships when you do not have sufficient resources will cause them to wait at the shipyard until the resources become available and upgrade as soon as the resources become available. If you have neither reserves nor income of the required resources (e.g. you have 0(+0)  Dark Matter for Dark Matter Thrusters) then the ships will idle at the shipyard indefinitely.
All Ships have similar , displayed on the right side of the star-background part of the ship designer UI. Most of these slots cannot be left empty (the exception being an FTL Drive, but this component is necessary for inter-system travel; a ship without one will be stuck in the system it was built in). Immobile ship types (Defense Platforms and Ion Cannons) have limited slots to reflect that they are immobile. Titans and Juggernauts have an additional slot for auras. The article on core components goes into detail on what options are available, what stats those options have, and any special mechanics related to the components.
All Ships have slots for  and . These slots can be left empty. What specific slots are available will change based on what Sections are used in the design (see below). Weapon component slots are at the top of the star background part of the UI, separated by section. Utility component slots are on the bottom, also separated by section. There are a great amount of options for these types of slots, so please reference the articles on each type for what can be fitted in the slots as well as statistics and mechanics.
Sections
Each ship and station is made up of 1-3 sections, and each section may have its own design. Ship section designs vary based on where they are in the ship (bow, core, stern), while station section designs are all the same. Each section design has space for a variety of offensive and defensive modules. For example, one station section may be designed to carry a single  large weapon or four  small weapons. Changing sections is done by clicking the section name in the top-center of the Ship Designer UI, above the star background. Changing sections will reset all component slots to being empty.
To add an item to a module, click on the module (in the center part of the menu, identified by  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  , ) to see what items can be added.
The components that can be placed in  ,  ,  , and  weapon slots, as well as  ,  ,  ,  , and  slots, can be found on the  page. The components that can be placed in  ,  , and  utility slots, as well as  slots, are found on the  page.
Weapon slots trade at a fixed ratio, with the following being equivalent:
1× 
2×  or 
4×  or 
8×  or 
The only exception is the Destroyer section Bow / Picket Ship, which lacks 1×  or  compared to the other sections.
Corvette sections
Frigate sections
Destroyer sections

Cruiser sections


Battleship sections


 Titan sections


 Colossus sections
 Juggernaut sections
 Menacing corvette sections
 Menacing destroyer sections
 Menacing cruiser sections
 Star-Eater sections
 Nanite Swarmer sections
 Nanite Interdictor sections
 Riddle escort sections
 Enigma battlecruiser sections
 Paradox titan sections
 Mauler sections
 Weaver sections
 Harbinger sections
 Stinger sections
 Cipher Mauler sections
 Quandary Weaver sections
 Maze Harbinger sections
 Cryptic Stinger sections
Defense platform sections

 Ion Cannon sections
Auto-design
Initially all ship designs are created and updated automatically, although this behavior can be disabled by the player. Auto-design will design ships that spread their defenses and damage types evenly. Auto-design can also be given a ship role to create more specialized designs.
