Megastructures

Version

This article has been verified for the current PC  (4.2) of the game.

Humanoid Dyson Sphere under construction
Megastructures are colossal constructions. Expensive and time-consuming to build or repair, these remarkable feats of engineering are nonetheless important wonders that provide large bonuses, demonstrating the technological and economic primacy of the builders' empire. They cannot be built in orbit of a celestial object that has an uninvestigated anomaly. All megastructures except  Gateways are destroyed if a Star-Eater destroys the system and cannot be restored after.
Contents























Construction
All megastructures require a construction ship for their initial stage; later stages do not. Many megastructures have different visual textures depending on the ship appearance of the empire that built or restored them.
Each stage of a megastructure has a required time to build measured in days. By default, construction progress is equal to 1 per day. The following factors modify this, generally increasing the rate such as progress might be 1.5, 2, or even more per day. Thus, a megastructure stage that requires 3600 days (10 years) can be completed in fewer than 3600 days.
FTL megastructures
FTL megastructures can only be constructed at the edge of a system and allow fleets to traverse to an identical megastructure, greatly easing travel across the galaxy. They work together with the FTL megastructures of another empire unless borders are closed or the empires are at war with each other. FTL megastructures can be constructed in any system which doesn't already have that type of megastructure. They can also be dismantled if the empire has the technology to build them and is at peace. Unlike other megastructures, they can be constructed in the systems of subjects as well.
Gateways

Real scale of a Gateway
While exploring the galaxy, empires may find abandoned  gateways that were once part of a massive, galaxy-spanning network. The number of abandoned gateways can be scaled or disabled by . Note that even if gateways are disabled, at least one gateway will exist in the galaxy if any empire has the  Galactic Doorstep or  Imperial Fiefdom origin.
Once an abandoned gateway is discovered, the  Gateway Activation technology can be drawn; this technology allows abandoned gateways to be repaired. Repairing an abandoned gateway takes 2 years and costs  6000 energy and  2500 alloys. When a gateway is activated for the first time in the galaxy, another random gateway is also activated along with it.
Gateways allow travel to any other gateway instantly, so long as the borders are open and the destination is not controlled by an enemy empire. As a , Gateways generally act like a hyperlane connection between systems, such that  and  can be extended through them, however  do not extend through gateways. Dismantling a gateway costs  2500 Energy and takes 1 year.
Once the  Gateway Activation technology is researched, the  Gateway Construction technology can appear, which allows new gateways to be constructed. Gateways are constructed in two stages. The first stage requires a construction ship to place the site outside the system's gravity wall. The second stage does not require a construction ship.

Repairing any gateway has a 20% chance to discover the ; this chance increases to 50% on subsequent repairs or if the planet . If the empire has the  Galactic Doorstep origin, the chance is 33% for the first gateway and 67% for subsequent gateways or if Skravird has been discovered.
L-Gates
 L-gates are a special type of gateway, with a separate network from regular gateways. Instead of jumping from any to any, L-Gates all jump to the Terminal Egress system in the L-Cluster, then from there to any other L-Gate, so long as that system's borders are open or the fleet's owner is at war with the system's owner. L-Gates are opened through a special project, and new L-Gates cannot be constructed.
Hyper Relays

Real scale of a Hyper Relay
Hyper Relays can be constructed once the  Hyper Relays technology is researched and allow ships to jump to Hyper Relays in adjacent systems instead of using the existing hyperlane connections, thereby avoiding having to traverse systems at sublight speeds. They are constructed directly in a single stage. Hyper Relay links are shown on the galaxy map as a thicker hyperlane. Potential (inactive) links are shown as yellow connections on the galaxy map. A link may be inactive because of closed borders, war, or if the Hyper Relay is ruined. Dismantling a Hyper Relay costs  500 Energy and takes 1 year; empires with a 
 Scavengers
 civic gain  50 alloys, and  10 rare crystals.
Constructing a Hyper Relay takes one year and has the following cost:
25  Influence
100  Rare Crystals
500  Alloys if the empire uses a Mechanical shipset
250  Alloys and 875  Food if the empire uses a Biological shipset
Hyper Relays can grant additional effects based on  edicts and . Hyper Relay edicts require the empire's capital system to be part of the network, while the benefits granted by subject specializations require a connection between the overlord's capital and the subject's capital. Subjects do not benefit from their overlord's network effects.
Hyper Relays can be built from the galaxy view, which places them semi-randomly within the system. In systems with  wormholes or existing  gateways, it is recommended to instead go into the system view to manually place the Hyper Relay near to the wormhole or gateway to better facilitate travel, as Hyper Relays do not connect through wormholes or gateways.
Habitats

Mammalian habitat central complex
Habitats are  megastructures that can be built above stars or planets and are finished in a single stage. Each system can only have one habitat. The habitat still requires colonization, but the colony develops twice as fast as on planets. Habitats cannot be built in systems with a ring world, above moons, or above celestial objects with another megastructure. Building a habitat requires the  Orbital Habitats technology, takes 5 years and costs 200  Influence as well as the following:
1500  Alloys if the empire uses a Mechanical shipset
750  Alloys and 2625  Food if the empire uses a Biological shipset
The maximum number of districts that a habitat can have is 0.25 per planet or star in the system for each habitat tier. The maximum number for each type of resource district depends on the  Energy,  Minerals and  Research deposits in the system (deposits of unity and rare resources count as research for this purpose). Each deposit grants (1 + half of its value) districts, rounded down. Each time a resource district is constructed it creates an orbital on a celestial body with its resource if any is still available, replacing any existing mining or research station. Orbitals are identical in effects and upkeep to mining and research stations but cannot be attacked by fleets. Habitats do not have planetary features with the exception of a few unique habitats.
Only  Gestalt Consciousness,  Void Dwellers or empires with the  Voidborne ascension perk can construct housing buildings on habitats.
Habitats are shown in one of three tiers in the outliner, depending on the level of the capital building.
The following unlock the ability to build habitats:
 If the Utopia DLC is active, any empire can research the technologies to construct and upgrade habitats.
 Empires with the  Void Dwellers origin start with a habitat and the technology to build more. They can research the technology to upgrade them from the start.
 Empires with the  Knights of the Toxic God origin start with a habitat. They can research the technology to build more from the start but cannot research the technology to upgrade them without the  Utopia DLC.
 Empires with the  Payback origin can gain a unique size 10 habitat called Recovered Asset as one of their two choices following the conclusion of the The Aftermath of Battle . Choosing the habitat unlocks the technology to build more but cannot research the technology to upgrade them without the  Utopia DLC.
 If the Apocalypse DLC is active, empires created by the  breaking up start with the technology to construct habitats. These habitats can be captured by other empires.
Habitats can otherwise be obtained in the following ways:
The  unique system can randomly spawn, containing two habitats. The system does not require any DLC to spawn but does not contain enough celestial objects to support districts.
 If the First Contact DLC is active, the  has a 25% chance to spawn. The Ithome's Gate system contains 3 habitats. Each habitat has a unique modifier granting it max  Habitability and +8  Reactor, Mining or Research districts.
 If the Cosmic Storms DLC is active, a habitat can be obtained by completing the Hold the Line archaeological site.
Habitat Central Complexes can be ruined by a  or crises. If ruined, all orbitals are destroyed.
Deep space citadels

Tier 3 deep space citadel
Deep space citadels are large defensive stations that can contain certain starbase buildings and can support defense platforms. Similar to a starbase, when a deep space citadel runs out of hull points it is occupied if the attacker was an empire and destroyed if the attacker was a crisis or using the Existential Expulsion casus belli.
Normally only Fallen Empire systems have deep space citadels, but if the  BioGenesis DLC is enabled all empires can research the technology to construct their own. Deep space citadels can be constructed anywhere in a system. Each system can have one deep space citadel, and the number is increased by one for each of the following:
 Mega-Engineering technology
 Eternal Vigilance ascension perk
 Starlit Citadel origin
Deep space citadels are designed in the ship designer and when constructing or upgrading one there will be a prompt to choose which design to use. Their cost is not affected by the installed components. Deep space citadels come in three tiers. They are constructed at tier I and then upgraded. Deep space citadels can have their design changed if the empire has the technology to build them but the current construction or upgrade cost must be paid again.
Orbital rings

Mammalian orbital ring with shipyard module
Orbital Rings can be built around colonized planets to act as an additional starbase in the system and provide useful bonuses for the planet below. They do not require a construction site and are finished in a single stage by the construction ship. Tier 2 and 3 are upgraded similarly to starbases without the need for a construction ship. Orbital rings also have  +100% fire rate.
If an Orbital Ring is defeated by a crisis it will be ruined. The megastructure can only be rebuild if the planet is controlled so either the system will have to be reclaimed before the crisis can purge the planet or the planet will have to be terraformed and recolonized.
Modules
Orbital Rings use their own set of modules, which are mostly similar to Starbase modules except that they do not interact with trade routes in any way. An  Orbital Assembly Complex holding on the planet provides additional bonuses to each module.
Fleet modules
Fleet modules allow the orbital ring to construct fleets. Multiple fleet modules may be constructed to produce multiple ships or space fauna in parallel but only one type of fleet module can be constructed on an orbital ring. Each fleet module costs 50  alloys, takes  180 days to construct and has an  energy upkeep of 1 unit per month. Each fleet module can produce two ships or space fauna at a time instead of one if an  Orbital Assembly Complex is constructed on the planet.
Defense modules
Defense modules increase the orbital ring's effectiveness in combat and allow for the construction of additional defense platforms. Each defense module costs 50  alloys, takes  180 days to construct and has an  energy upkeep of 1 unit per month.
Buildings
In addition to most of the regular , Orbital Rings can construct a set of buildings that improve the planet's output. All of them take  360 days to build.
Planetary building replacements
The following orbital ring buildings fulfill the same function as certain planet buildings. They have the same requirements to construct and cannot be built if the matching building has been constructed on the planet.
Multi-stage megastructures
Multi-stage megastructures are constructed in multiple stages that require the technology with the same name before they can be constructed. Empires lacking the technology can make use of a multi-stage megastructure which they conquered from another empire, but they cannot upgrade it before they research the prerequisite technology.
Multi-stage megastructures start with a construction site that provides no benefit. However, each subsequent construction phase brings increasing bonuses, culminating with the end of the megastructure construction.
Only one multi-stage megastructure may be built in each system. Multi-stage megastructures must be built either over an uninhabitable planet or a star. There must not be an anomaly present on the planet or star, but an anomaly on another planet or star in the system does not block construction.
Each empire can build build, upgrade, or restore only one multi-stage megastructure at a time. This limit is increased by the following factors:
Most multi-stage megastructures are limited in how many times they may be built. An empire with the  Isolated Contingency Core relic can build an additional megastructure of each type. If an empire loses a limited megastructure, it cannot build another of that type. Megastructures obtained through conquest and ruined ones that were found in the galaxy and repaired do not count against this limit. A conquered incomplete megastructure can still be upgraded as long as the new owner has the prerequisite technology.
Dyson Swarms and Dyson Sphere
The Dyson Swarms and the Dyson Sphere are two megastructures the construction of which may be linked depending on which DLCs are enabled. Neither megastructure can be constructed in binary or trinary systems or around pulsars, neutron stars or black holes.
If the  The Machine Age DLC is enabled, Dyson Swarms can be constructed after researching the  Dyson Swarm technology
If the  Utopia DLC is enabled, a Dyson Sphere can be built after taking the  Galactic Wonders ascension perk and researching the  Dyson Sphere technology.
If the  The Machine Age DLC is not enabled, a Dyson Sphere is built from scratch, starting from Construction Site
If the  The Machine Age DLC is enabled, a Dyson Sphere is built by upgrading a completed Dyson Swarm. It upgrades to Stage II (Initial), and inherits all effects of the Dyson Swarm.
A ruined Dyson Sphere is always restored to Stage V (Completed), and only requires the  Mega-Engineering technology to restore.
If the  Nemesis DLC is enabled, a Dyson Sphere can be further upgraded as part of the .
Discoverable Ring Worlds
Up to 8 ringworlds can spawn naturally in a game in various states. Damaged segments can be repaired with the  Mega-Engineering technology for the same cost as finishing a new segment.
One in the  system. All 4 habitable sections are intact and each contains one pre-FTL civilization, none advanced beyond Steam Age. The system was abandoned by an Enigmatic Observer Fallen Empire but contains automated defense platforms totaling over 50k .
One in the  system. It requires completing the Cybrex precursor event chain. The ringworld is completely ruined and requires repairs on each section.
One in the  system. It is only revealed if  sterilizes 20% of the galaxy. A short time after the Contingency is defeated, the Cybrex leave the galaxy, leaving the ringworld free for the taking.
One in a random empty system if the  Utopia DLC is enabled. It is completely ruined and each section requires repairing. If the  Distant Stars DLC is enabled as well, the system has a 50% chance to contain a unique anomaly.
Three in the systems of the  if the  Synthetic Dawn DLC is enabled. The ringworld in the home system has three intact and one ruined section, while the other two ringworlds are completely ruined and require each section to be repaired separately. If the Contingency appears and the Ancient Caretakers awaken to defend the galaxy, they also disappear like the Cybrex once the Contingency is defeated, leaving their systems free for the taking.
Each empire with the  Shattered Ring origin starts in a ringworld system with 1-3 segments depending on the Guaranteed Habitable Worlds game rule. By default, only one empire with the origin can be generated, but force-spawning ignores that limit.
Ruined megastructures

Ruined Dyson Sphere
Ruined versions of a multi-stage megastructure can be found while exploring the galaxy, with larger galaxies having a chance to spawn more ruined megastructures. Repairing them generally requires only the  Mega-Engineering technology. If not yet researched, owning a system with a ruined megastructure also grants a ×20 weight for  Mega-Engineering to appear.
While they upgrade from their broken to a fully functional state in one step, they do not count for any achievements. However, they also do not count against any build limit for that particular megastructure either.
Aetherophasic Engine
The Aetherophasic Engine is a megastructure that appears in the capital system of every empire that reaches the final  level. Each stage of the megastructure requires gargantuan amounts of  dark matter as well as 10 years to upgrade. If the system is conquered by another empire, the megastructure is ruined and can be repaired if the original empire reclaims it. Empires that reached the final crisis level and lost their Aetherophasic Engine but conquer another one have the option to take control of the new megastructure.
The Aetherophasic Engine visually resembles a Dyson sphere megastructure, the sole difference apart from output is generating system-wide shockwave distortions that are purely cosmetic as the Engine is upgraded.
Galactic Crucible

A Galactic Crucible
The Galactic Crucible is a megastructure that can be constructed by empires who took the  Galactic Hyperthermia ascension perk and either completed the initial special project or have the  Red Giant origin and finished the Red Giant Expansion situation one way or another. It must be built in a single star system which does not have colonies or an Arc Furnace and where the star is not a Pulsar, Neutron Star or Black Hole. An empire can only build one Galactic Crucible.
If the empire has the  Galactic Hyperthermia ascension perk and reached the second crisis level, starting with the Galactic Crucible Chasis stage the megastructure will have a second tab called Overclocking, which has the following modes:
If an empire with a  Thermophile founder species conquers a system with a Galactic Crucible it will receive 150-100000  Unity.
If at the end of a war a Galactic Crucible is in the borders of an empire that didn't build it, the new owner will receive the option to either destroy the megastructure or turn it into a Galactic Crucible Institute. Destroying the megastructure will award 700-30000  Alloys, 700-2000000  Unity and 250-5000  Dark Matter.
Synaptic Lathe

The Synaptic Lathe UI
Constructing a Synaptic Lathe requires the  Scalable Reservoir Computing technology, which is unlocked by the  Cosmogenesis ascension perk. Only one Synaptic Lathe can be constructed. Constructing the megastructure takes 2400 days and requires 300  Influence and the following:
15000  Alloys if the empire uses a Mechanical shipset
7500  Alloys and 26250  Food if the empire uses a Biological shipset
The Synaptic Lathe has many functions normally found only on planets. It has  Stability,  Housing,  Amenities,  Pops, a designation and ascension tier. It also has an  Efficiency value, which is increased by 5% for each pop. Low  Stability cannot create revolts but still affects job output. The Synaptic Lathe has its own set of  and districts and its appearance changes as the capital building is upgraded.
All pops in a Synaptic Lathe have the  Neural Chip job. Pops cannot grow on a Synaptic Lathe but they can be resettled even if the empire policy does not otherwise allow it. Pops in the Synaptic Lathe are purged over time regardless of species rights; the rate of the purge scales with the population of the Lathe. If the population drops to zero, the owner gets an event to either refill the Lathe with 100 pops, or let it break. The last pop cannot be resettled. Pops with the  Virtual trait do not generate resources when placed in a Synaptic Lathe.
The Synaptic Lathe has no defenses and immediately surrenders if an enemy fleet enters orbit. The megastructure will be disabled if the occupying empire does not have the  Cosmogenesis ascension perk. If the system is completely occupied, the megastructure is destroyed. The occupying empire will get the option to resettle half of the pops to the capital, gain 500-1000000  Research and −75 Decaying Opinion with every non-fallen empire, or do nothing. Empires with the  Cosmogenesis ascension perk can choose to keep the megastructure instead.
Grand Archive

A Grand Archive
A Grand Archive requires the  Galactic Archivism technology and can only be constructed over worlds that have at least 2500  Pops unless the empire has the  Wilderness origin. It is constructed in one stage and has a base upkeep of 10  Energy. The Grand Archive enables turning  into exhibits and increases Vivarium Capacity by +50. If communications with the Curator Order have been established, shortly after the megastructure is completed, the empire will receive +10  Opinion with them. Empires with the  Treasure Hunters origin or a 
 Galactic Curators
 or 
 Beastmasters
 civic will also gain a moderate amount of scaled  Unity when the megastructure is completed. The Grand Archive takes 1800 days to build and costs the following resources:
1000  Alloys if the empire uses a Mechanical shipset
500  Alloys and 500  Food if the empire uses a Biological shipset
Both costs are reduced by −25% if the empire has the a 
 Galactic Curators
 civic
If the starbase of the system housing the Grand Archive is dismantled, the megastructure is removed. The empire will be refunded 500  Alloys and all space fauna above the Vivarium Capacity is culled.
An empire can only have one Grand Archive. If a subject with a Grand Archive is integrated while the empire already has one, the subject's megastructure is removed. If a system housing a Grand Archive is conquered, the megastructure is destroyed and all space fauna above the Vivarium Capacity is released. The empire that conquered the system will steal one specimen from each category, or two if it has the  Barbaric Despoilers civic. If  Ancient Relics is installed, it will also receive 100  Minor Artifacts.
Behemoth megastructures

Behemoth Egg in a nebula system
Behemoth megastructures are available to empires with the  Behemoth Fury ascension perk and used to create Behemoths. Hatching them requires the crisis level 2.
Behemoth Egg megastructures are destroyed if an enraged Behemoth reaches them.
Shroud Seal

A Shroud Seal
Constructing a Shroud Seal requires the  Psionic Suppression technology, costs 500  Alloys and 100  Zro and takes 3 years. Every Shroud Seal reduces the intensity of Psionic Auras by 10 each day in the system and by 1 each day in adjacent systems and reduces the fire rate of weapons unlocked through the  Psionics tech tree by half. The megastructure has an upkeep of 5  Energy per month. If an empire has the  The Dreamer relic each Shroud Seal will also produce +25  Unity and +10 Naval Capacity and their range will be increased to affect systems two hyperlanes away. AI empires who have a founder species with the  Psionic or  Latent Psionic trait will always dismantle Shroud Seals.
The first time an empire completes a Shroud Seal after establishing communications with the Shroudwalkers enclave it will lose −5  Opinion with them.
The system of the Mindwardens enclave always contains a Shroud Seal. If the Mindwardens raid an empire, they will place a Shroud Seal on the attacked system.
If the  Cosmic Storms DLC is also installed, a Shroud Seal makes  Shroud Storms 75% less likely to spawn in the empire's borders.
