Player crisis

This article is about crises caused by regular empires. For the midgame and endgame crises, see .
Version

This article has been verified for the current PC  (4.2) of the game.
Regular empires can become a crisis by taking a . All crisis ascension perks will unlock the Crisis tab, where the crisis progression comes in 5 levels and grants various perks. The last level can only be unlocked by independent empires. An empire becoming a crisis will not stop endgame crises from occurring.
 Opinion penalties only apply from empires that have at least  Medium Intel on government unless the player crisis reached the final level.
Contents







Galactic Nemesis

Galactic Nemesis crisis progression
Empires that pick the  Galactic Nemesis ascension perk will be able to acquire  Menace and complete expensive crisis Special Projects to progress through the crisis levels. It should be noted that only upon reaching the fifth crisis level is the empire treated as any other crisis (Total War with every other empire). This means that through levels 1–4, the "crisis" empire acts as normal, save for not being able to become the Custodian. Only level 5 crisis is the "point of no return", gated by the Special Project to level up, so to speak. This gives the ascension perk far more value for empires who don't want to take the final step, with its various bonuses.
An AI empire that became a Galactic Nemesis will have their  shift to .
 Menace is gained by completing crisis objectives. The amount granted by each objective is reduced if the galaxy is larger or more populated with empires.
Once enough  Menace and special projects are completed, the empire will gain a new crisis level.
Upon reaching Existential Threat level, the empire will gain control of the . Should it be fully upgraded, the entire galaxy will be destroyed and the Galactic Nemesis will be declared winner of the game. They will also be awarded the  Big Red Button achievement.
Cosmogenesis

Cosmogenesis crisis progression
Empires that pick the  Cosmogenesis ascension perk will be able to acquire  Advanced Logic and research expensive technologies to progress through the crisis levels. Compared to a Galactic Nemesis empire, the character of a Cosmogenesis empire is more dangerously reckless than malicious, and the end goal is not the destruction of the galaxy, though the empire's experiments in tampering with the fabric of reality have far-reaching and often destructive consequences. Unlike Galactic Nemesis, reaching Existential Threat level does not lead to automatic Total War with the galaxy and it has smaller  Opinion penalties in comparison, meaning a Cosmogenesis faction can potentially remain at peace with the rest of the galaxy provided it uses diplomacy efficiently.
 Advanced Logic is gained by completing crisis objectives. The amount granted by each objective scales down with each empire present in the galaxy. Most of the hostility of this crisis is caused by Purging pops via the ; while this can be avoided, it will lead to much slower progression. Because of how Purging mechanics work, it is also possible to bypass the diplomatic penalties entirely by only using  Gestalt Consciousness pops in the Lathe.
Once enough  Advanced Logic is obtained and technologies researched, the empire will gain a new crisis level.  Advanced Logic can also be gained by completing the Vultaum precursor chain.
If the Keepers of Knowledge are present in the galaxy, the first time an empire researches the  Applied Infinity Thesis technology, the fallen empire will ask them to accept a modifier of −10%  Research Speed and −25%  Advanced Logic from Jobs for 20 years or lose −75  Opinion with the Keepers of Knowledge. In addition, each time the technology is researched, there is a 1% chance to trigger a Guardians of the Galaxy awakening.

The Horizon Needle
After reaching the final crisis level, the crisis empire must research the extremely expensive  Nascent Universes technology and then construct the equally expensive Horizon Needle. The Horizon Needle is a ship but it is constructed like a megastructure. The construction takes 2400 days and is done in orbit of the capital. The ship is very resilient and has a Jump Drive regardless of whether the empire researched it or not, but has no weapons. Once completed, it needs to be ordered to embark the population of every colony, which will decolonize the former colony. Once every colony has been embarked, the Horizon Needle must embark the population of the empire capital. Unlike colonies, the capital will not be decolonized once the population is embarked and will retain 2000  Pops, but the empires cannot colonize new worlds. Finally, the Horizon Needle must either be ordered to dive into a black hole or complete a special project to dive into the supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy, the latter requiring the Horizon Needle to remain at the capital for a year. Regardless of what option is taken, the game is won upon completion.
There are multiple endings for Cosmogenesis depending on whether the special project was used or which black hole was plunged into.
Sending the Horizon Needle into any normal black hole not connected to any events leads to the default ending.
Diving into the supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy leads to a separate ending. It is slightly altered if the empire formed a Covenant with a Shroud entity or has the  Knights of the Toxic God origin.
The following black holes have unique endings: Great Wound, , , the black holes where the  or  emerge, the black hole where the  event chain started and the black hole created by .
Empires with  Obsessional Directive have a different ending regardless of the chosen black hole as long as they never missed their quota and have not gone for the galactic core black hole. This ending awards the  A Universe of Paperclips achievement.
Post-Cosmogenesis galaxy
The Cosmogenesis ending will make the empire unplayable and bring the option to switch to another empire if any exists.
The Cosmogenesis empire will become a Fallen Empire. Its personality will depend on empire ethics. It will retain all subjects and if it is part of a federation, it will remain as a member. If it had a Synaptic Lathe, the megastructure is destroyed. If the empire was a  Hive Mind, it will possess unique civics not found in conventional Fallen Empires and its capital will become a  Hive World. The new Fallen Empire will resettle all habitable planets and megastructures within its core sector, filling them with Fallen Empire buildings, and have a  in every system; however, all territory outside the core sector will be lost.
The following effect will occur upon a Cosmogenesis victory across the entire galaxy:
9% of all systems will be destroyed.
50% of all starbases will be destroyed.
30% of all fleets will be destroyed.
80% of the systems will gain random deposits.
Every surviving non-capital planet will be radically changed in the following way:
5% chance the planet becomes a Shattered World.
5% chance the planet becomes a Black Hole.
20% chance the colony is destroyed and the planet gains +200%  Colony Development Speed,  Pop Growth Speed and  Mechanical Pop Assembly Speed and +75%  Planetary Build Speed for 10 years.
21% chance the colony gains 85  Devastation, −100%  Pop Growth Speed and  Mechanical Pop Assembly Speed and −200%  Planetary Build Speed for 10 years.
21% chance the colony loses 1300  Pops and gains 8 blockers.
21% chance the colony loses 2000  Pops and gains 6 blockers.
7% chance the colony gains +200%  Colony Development Speed,  Pop Growth Speed and  Mechanical Pop Assembly Speed and +75%  Planetary Build Speed for 10 years.
Every empire will gain +20%  Pop Amenities Usage, −20%  Happiness and −20  Stability for 5 years.
For 30 days, the date will not display properly.
It is possible to release a sector as a subject before completing the exodus, which will allow the player to continue playing as the released empire. The subject empire will keep its planets, pops, and technologies, including the Cosmogenesis technologies.
Behemoth Fury

Behemoth Fury crisis progression
Empires that pick the  Behemoth Fury ascension perk will be able to acquire  Feral Insight. Unlike other crisis paths, Behemoth Fury does not cause  Opinion penalties until the final crisis level is reached.
The first time the empire loses a Behemoth, it will also gain 1500  Feral Insight.
Once enough  Feral Insight has been acquired and the required objectives are completed, the empire will gain a new crisis level.
To win the game, the Behemoth Fury empire must finish the Growing Pains situation and then defeat the  guardian and any existing Class IV Behemoths controlled by other empires. Should they achieve these objectives, they will win the game at the beginning of the next year, awarded with the  King of Monsters achievement. All planets will be depopulated, all starbases and stations will be removed, and a final choice will appear.
Choosing to leave the galaxy will result in all fleets disappearing.
Choosing to stay will cause all fleets to follow the Class IV Behemoth, who will become even more powerful and roam the galaxy. The Class IV Behemoth will be hostile towards all empires except former subjects of the crisis empire. If the empire had any Behemoth Egg or Chrysalis, they will hatch in 10 years. Class I and Class II Behemoths will grow in size every 10 years as well.
If the empire has communicated with the Prethoryn Scourge a third option will be given to confront the Hunters, which will result in all fleets disappearing. Two years later all empires in the galaxy will have the option to issue a special project to find out where the Class IV Behemoth went. The special project costs 600000  Physics and its outcome is purely narrative although empires with the  Cosmogenesis ascension perk will gain 1000  Advanced Logic.
Behemoths

Class III Behemoth
The Behemoth Fury crisis path grants access to Behemoths, which are hatched from Behemoth Egg megastructures. Behemoths come in four classes depending on their size and cannot be merged with fleets.
Behemoths are fed by destroying bioships, space fauna, guardians or other Behemoths or by bombarding planets. Each time a Behemoth gains 1 Growth, the empire will gain 500  Food. Guardians will always give 40 Growth. Once a Behemoth has fed sufficiently, they can be ordered to grow up in any owned system, which will create a Behemoth Chrysalis megastructure.
When a Behemoth bombards a planet, it will slowly gain Growth and spawn hostile armies. If the armies defeat the defenders, all pops are instantly purged and the Behemoth gains 1 Growth for every 100 pops. The world will also gain the  Devastated Settlements,  Devoured Biosphere and  Slumbering Behemoths blockers if it does not have them already.
Devouring a planet with a Class III or IV Behemoth has the same diplomatic penalties as using a World Cracker.
The Class IV Behemoth is grown from a Class III Behemoth that completes the The Mind Meld special project. It has the ability to lay eggs and is upgraded at each stage of the Growing Pains situation. If a Class IV Behemoth is killed, its empire is instantly destroyed.
If Behemoths are not fed for too long, they will become enraged within 1-3 years. They can also be enraged manually via a fleet action for the cost of 15000  Food and 150  Exotic Gases and a cooldown of 540 days. Enraged Behemoths are hostile towards everyone, attack all ships in the system and then head for the closest colony or Behemoth Egg to destroy. It will then wait. Enraged lasts 180 days out of combat or until the Behemoth is defeated by an empire with the  Behemoth Fury ascension perk. Note that having a cloaked science ship in the same system as a Behemoth will prevent it from exiting the rage naturally. This is likely a bug. Destroying an egg gives the Behemoth 50 Growth. Each time an enraged Behemoth enters another empire's borders, it gives a permanent −50  Opinion and each time it attacks one of their colonies or Behemoth Eggs, it gives a permanent −500  Opinion.
If two Behemoths controlled by the same player are in the same system, one of them will become enraged but will not attack the closest colony or Behemoth Egg if it wins.
Empire with the  Reanimators or  Permanent Employment that kill a Behemoth cannot reanimate it but will gain 10000  Food and a scaled amount of  Unity and  Society Research. If the empire is also  Spiritualist, the  Unity reward will be even larger.
Galactic Hyperthermia

Galactic Hyperthermia crisis progression
Empires that pick the  Galactic Hyperthermia ascension perk will be able to acquire  Crystallized Entropy. An AI empire that goes through this crisis path will have their personality shift to .
Once enough  Crystallized Entropy has been acquired and the required objectives are completed, the empire will gain a new crisis level. Unlike other player crises, unlocking the first level requires completing a special project too and every subsequent level requires the empire to be independent. Empires with the  Red Giant origin who finish the Red Giant Expansion situation one way or another will not receive or have to complete the first special project. Conquering a Galactic Crucible from another empire will not make progress towards increasing the crisis level.
After upgrading the Galactic Crucible megastructure to level 2, it will be able to build Conduits, equal to the number of owned systems, as well as replace any lost Conduit. Whether the megastructure will do so as well as how fast depends on its Overclocking mode. Conduits are ships equipped with a  Lensed Paralyzer weapon, which prevents any target from moving or attacking for 7 days. In addition, Conduits have the ability to turn non-blackhole stars into  Class M stars. The process takes 6 months and afterwards the Conduit will no longer be able to move but can still be disbanded and the Galactic Crucible will replace them. Owned colonies in systems with a Conduit gain +5%  Amenities and  Resources from Jobs. Conduits will automatically travel to an owned system and transform the star but before the process is complete, they can be manually ordered to travel to another system.
After upgrading the Galactic Crucible megastructure to level 3, the empire will have to choose between two special projects: Designated Firestorm and Unforeseen Correlation.
Designated Firestorm costs 25000  Engineering Research, allows the Galactic Crucible megastructure to be upgraded to Galactic Crucible Hub and reach the last two crisis levels, and spawns 6 empty systems around the galactic core.
Unforeseen Correlation costs 25000  Physics Research and allows the Galactic Crucible megastructure to be upgraded to Galactic Crucible Institute but prevents reaching the last two crisis levels.
After upgrading the Galactic Crucible megastructure to level 5, a wormhole will appear in the system with the Galactic Crucible that connects to 3 of the 6 systems that were spawned the galactic core. After 4 years, the other 3 systems will be connected to the rest of the galaxy by hyperlanes. The Mobilization situation will also start when the megastructure is fully upgraded. When the Mobilization situation ends, every empire in the galaxy that is not Genocidal or player crisis will receive the option to declare war on the crisis empire. In addition, if the Galactic Community or Galactic Imperium exist, a  Declare Crisis resolution is instantly passed against the crisis empire and if the empire was part of the Galactic Community or Galactic Imperium, it will be removed from it. After the Mobilization situation ends, the Galactic Firestorm situation starts for every empire in the galaxy. If more than 3 of the 6 systems around the galactic core have a Conduit present, the situation will make progress at a rate of 3 each month. If less than 3 of the 6 systems around the galactic core have a Conduit present, the situation will lose progress at a rate of 3 each month. The situation will only end if the crisis empire either succeeds or is destroyed.
If the Galactic Firestorm situation progresses completely, the crisis empire will win the game, receive the  Crystallized Singularity relic and the  Galactic Firestorm achievement, and if its founder species has the  Organic trait, it is replaced by  Thermophile. Every star in the galaxy except Black Holes will become a  Class M Red Giant, every planet that is not an  Ecumenopolis will be terraformed into a  Volcanic World, every empire that does not have the  Galactic Hyperthermia ascension perk or a founder species with the  Thermophile trait is destroyed, and every empire with a founder species with the  Thermophile trait will receive 350-1000000  Unity. If the Contingency crisis it taking place, it will be destroyed.
Depending on game difficulty, when the Mobilization situation ends, Fallen Empires may declare war on the crisis empire if they exist. This applies regardless of whether the crisis empire is a human player or AI empire. One Fallen Empire will declare war on Captain, 2 on Commodore, 4 on Admiral and all 6 on Grand Admiral. One of them may also awaken. If the Shattered Fragments are present, they will not become involved unless they have awakened.
Empires whose founder species do not have the  Thermophile trait will receive a special project 3 months after reaching crisis level 2. The special project costs 2500  Society Research and completing it increases  Habitability on  Volcanic Worlds by +50%.
